THE FINANCIER


by Theodore Dreiser



Chapter I

The Philadelphia into which Frank Algernon Cowperwood was born was
a city of two hundred and fifty thousand and more. It was set with
handsome parks, notable buildings, and crowded with historic memories.
Many of the things that we and he knew later were not then in
existence--the telegraph, telephone, express company, ocean steamer,
city delivery of mails. There were no postage-stamps or registered
letters. The street car had not arrived. In its place were hosts of
omnibuses, and for longer travel the slowly developing railroad system
still largely connected by canals.

Cowperwood's father was a bank clerk at the time of Frank's birth,
but ten years later, when the boy was already beginning to turn a very
sensible, vigorous eye on the world, Mr. Henry Worthington Cowperwood,
because of the death of the bank's president and the consequent moving
ahead of the other officers, fell heir to the place vacated by the
promoted teller, at the, to him, munificent salary of thirty-five
hundred dollars a year. At once he decided, as he told his wife
joyously, to remove his family from 21 Buttonwood Street to 124 New
Market Street, a much better neighborhood, where there was a nice brick
house of three stories in height as opposed to their present two-storied
domicile. There was the probability that some day they would come into
something even better, but for the present this was sufficient. He was
exceedingly grateful.

Henry Worthington Cowperwood was a man who believed only what he saw and
was content to be what he was--a banker, or a prospective one. He was at
this time a significant figure--tall, lean, inquisitorial, clerkly--with
nice, smooth, closely-cropped side whiskers coming to almost the lower
lobes of his ears. His upper lip was smooth and curiously long, and
he had a long, straight nose and a chin that tended to be pointed. His
eyebrows were bushy, emphasizing vague, grayish-green eyes, and his hair
was short and smooth and nicely parted. He wore a frock-coat always--it
was quite the thing in financial circles in those days--and a high hat.
And he kept his hands and nails immaculately clean. His manner might
have been called severe, though really it was more cultivated than
austere.

Being ambitious to get ahead socially and financially, he was very
careful of whom or with whom he talked. He was as much afraid of
expressing a rabid or unpopular political or social opinion as he was
of being seen with an evil character, though he had really no opinion
of great political significance to express. He was neither anti- nor
pro-slavery, though the air was stormy with abolition sentiment and its
opposition. He believed sincerely that vast fortunes were to be made
out of railroads if one only had the capital and that curious thing, a
magnetic personality--the ability to win the confidence of others. He
was sure that Andrew Jackson was all wrong in his opposition to Nicholas
Biddle and the United States Bank, one of the great issues of the day;
and he was worried, as he might well be, by the perfect storm of wildcat
money which was floating about and which was constantly coming to his
bank--discounted, of course, and handed out again to anxious borrowers
at a profit. His bank was the Third National of Philadelphia, located in
that center of all Philadelphia and indeed, at that time, of practically
all national finance--Third Street--and its owners conducted a brokerage
business as a side line. There was a perfect plague of State banks,
great and small, in those days, issuing notes practically without
regulation upon insecure and unknown assets and failing and suspending
with astonishing rapidity; and a knowledge of all these was an important
requirement of Mr. Cowperwood's position. As a result, he had become the
soul of caution. Unfortunately, for him, he lacked in a great
measure the two things that are necessary for distinction in any
field--magnetism and vision. He was not destined to be a great
financier, though he was marked out to be a moderately successful one.

Mrs. Cowperwood was of a religious temperament--a small woman, with
light-brown hair and clear, brown eyes, who had been very attractive in
her day, but had become rather prim and matter-of-fact and inclined
to take very seriously the maternal care of her three sons and one
daughter. The former, captained by Frank, the eldest, were a source of
considerable annoyance to her, for they were forever making expeditions
to different parts of the city, getting in with bad boys, probably, and
seeing and hearing things they should neither see nor hear.

Frank Cowperwood, even at ten, was a natural-born leader. At the day
school he attended, and later at the Central High School, he was looked
upon as one whose common sense could unquestionably be trusted in all
cases. He was a sturdy youth, courageous and defiant. From the very
start of his life, he wanted to know about economics and politics. He
cared nothing for books. He was a clean, stalky, shapely boy, with
a bright, clean-cut, incisive face; large, clear, gray eyes; a
wide forehead; short, bristly, dark-brown hair. He had an incisive,
quick-motioned, self-sufficient manner, and was forever asking questions
with a keen desire for an intelligent reply. He never had an ache or
pain, ate his food with gusto, and ruled his brothers with a rod of
iron. "Come on, Joe!" "Hurry, Ed!" These commands were issued in no
rough but always a sure way, and Joe and Ed came. They looked up to
Frank from the first as a master, and what he had to say was listened to
eagerly.

He was forever pondering, pondering--one fact astonishing him quite as
much as another--for he could not figure out how this thing he had come
into--this life--was organized. How did all these people get into the
world? What were they doing here? Who started things, anyhow? His mother
told him the story of Adam and Eve, but he didn't believe it. There was
a fish-market not so very far from his home, and there, on his way to
see his father at the bank, or conducting his brothers on after-school
expeditions, he liked to look at a certain tank in front of one store
where were kept odd specimens of sea-life brought in by the Delaware Bay
fishermen. He saw once there a sea-horse--just a queer little sea-animal
that looked somewhat like a horse--and another time he saw an electric
eel which Benjamin Franklin's discovery had explained. One day he saw
a squid and a lobster put in the tank, and in connection with them was
witness to a tragedy which stayed with him all his life and cleared
things up considerably intellectually. The lobster, it appeared from
the talk of the idle bystanders, was offered no food, as the squid was
considered his rightful prey. He lay at the bottom of the clear glass
tank on the yellow sand, apparently seeing nothing--you could not
tell in which way his beady, black buttons of eyes were looking--but
apparently they were never off the body of the squid. The latter, pale
and waxy in texture, looking very much like pork fat or jade, moved
about in torpedo fashion; but his movements were apparently never out of
the eyes of his enemy, for by degrees small portions of his body began
to disappear, snapped off by the relentless claws of his pursuer. The
lobster would leap like a catapult to where the squid was apparently
idly dreaming, and the squid, very alert, would dart away, shooting out
at the same time a cloud of ink, behind which it would disappear. It was
not always completely successful, however. Small portions of its body
or its tail were frequently left in the claws of the monster below.
Fascinated by the drama, young Cowperwood came daily to watch.

One morning he stood in front of the tank, his nose almost pressed to
the glass. Only a portion of the squid remained, and his ink-bag was
emptier than ever. In the corner of the tank sat the lobster, poised
apparently for action.

The boy stayed as long as he could, the bitter struggle fascinating him.
Now, maybe, or in an hour or a day, the squid might die, slain by
the lobster, and the lobster would eat him. He looked again at the
greenish-copperish engine of destruction in the corner and wondered when
this would be. To-night, maybe. He would come back to-night.

He returned that night, and lo! the expected had happened. There was a
little crowd around the tank. The lobster was in the corner. Before him
was the squid cut in two and partially devoured.

"He got him at last," observed one bystander. "I was standing right here
an hour ago, and up he leaped and grabbed him. The squid was too tired.
He wasn't quick enough. He did back up, but that lobster he calculated
on his doing that. He's been figuring on his movements for a long time
now. He got him to-day."

Frank only stared. Too bad he had missed this. The least touch of sorrow
for the squid came to him as he stared at it slain. Then he gazed at the
victor.

"That's the way it has to be, I guess," he commented to himself. "That
squid wasn't quick enough." He figured it out.

"The squid couldn't kill the lobster--he had no weapon. The lobster
could kill the squid--he was heavily armed. There was nothing for the
squid to feed on; the lobster had the squid as prey. What was the result
to be? What else could it be? He didn't have a chance," he concluded
finally, as he trotted on homeward.

The incident made a great impression on him. It answered in a rough way
that riddle which had been annoying him so much in the past: "How is
life organized?" Things lived on each other--that was it. Lobsters lived
on squids and other things. What lived on lobsters? Men, of course!
Sure, that was it! And what lived on men? he asked himself. Was it other
men? Wild animals lived on men. And there were Indians and cannibals.
And some men were killed by storms and accidents. He wasn't so sure
about men living on men; but men did kill each other. How about wars and
street fights and mobs? He had seen a mob once. It attacked the Public
Ledger building as he was coming home from school. His father had
explained why. It was about the slaves. That was it! Sure, men lived on
men. Look at the slaves. They were men. That's what all this excitement
was about these days. Men killing other men--negroes.

He went on home quite pleased with himself at his solution.

"Mother!" he exclaimed, as he entered the house, "he finally got him!"

"Got who? What got what?" she inquired in amazement. "Go wash your
hands."

"Why, that lobster got that squid I was telling you and pa about the
other day."

"Well, that's too bad. What makes you take any interest in such things?
Run, wash your hands."

"Well, you don't often see anything like that. I never did." He went
out in the back yard, where there was a hydrant and a post with a little
table on it, and on that a shining tin-pan and a bucket of water. Here
he washed his face and hands.

"Say, papa," he said to his father, later, "you know that squid?"

"Yes."

"Well, he's dead. The lobster got him."

His father continued reading. "Well, that's too bad," he said,
indifferently.

But for days and weeks Frank thought of this and of the life he was
tossed into, for he was already pondering on what he should be in this
world, and how he should get along. From seeing his father count money,
he was sure that he would like banking; and Third Street, where his
father's office was, seemed to him the cleanest, most fascinating street
in the world.




Chapter II


The growth of young Frank Algernon Cowperwood was through years of what
might be called a comfortable and happy family existence. Buttonwood
Street, where he spent the first ten years of his life, was a lovely
place for a boy to live. It contained mostly small two and three-story
red brick houses, with small white marble steps leading up to the front
door, and thin, white marble trimmings outlining the front door and
windows. There were trees in the street--plenty of them. The road
pavement was of big, round cobblestones, made bright and clean by the
rains; and the sidewalks were of red brick, and always damp and cool. In
the rear was a yard, with trees and grass and sometimes flowers, for
the lots were almost always one hundred feet deep, and the house-fronts,
crowding close to the pavement in front, left a comfortable space in the
rear.

The Cowperwoods, father and mother, were not so lean and narrow that
they could not enter into the natural tendency to be happy and joyous
with their children; and so this family, which increased at the rate of
a child every two or three years after Frank's birth until there were
four children, was quite an interesting affair when he was ten and they
were ready to move into the New Market Street home. Henry Worthington
Cowperwood's connections were increased as his position grew more
responsible, and gradually he was becoming quite a personage. He already
knew a number of the more prosperous merchants who dealt with his bank,
and because as a clerk his duties necessitated his calling at other
banking-houses, he had come to be familiar with and favorably known in
the Bank of the United States, the Drexels, the Edwards, and others. The
brokers knew him as representing a very sound organization, and while he
was not considered brilliant mentally, he was known as a most reliable
and trustworthy individual.

In this progress of his father young Cowperwood definitely shared. He
was quite often allowed to come to the bank on Saturdays, when he would
watch with great interest the deft exchange of bills at the brokerage
end of the business. He wanted to know where all the types of money came
from, why discounts were demanded and received, what the men did with
all the money they received. His father, pleased at his interest, was
glad to explain so that even at this early age--from ten to
fifteen--the boy gained a wide knowledge of the condition of the country
financially--what a State bank was and what a national one; what brokers
did; what stocks were, and why they fluctuated in value. He began to
see clearly what was meant by money as a medium of exchange, and how all
values were calculated according to one primary value, that of gold.
He was a financier by instinct, and all the knowledge that pertained to
that great art was as natural to him as the emotions and subtleties
of life are to a poet. This medium of exchange, gold, interested him
intensely. When his father explained to him how it was mined, he dreamed
that he owned a gold mine and waked to wish that he did. He was likewise
curious about stocks and bonds and he learned that some stocks and bonds
were not worth the paper they were written on, and that others were
worth much more than their face value indicated.

"There, my son," said his father to him one day, "you won't often see
a bundle of those around this neighborhood." He referred to a series
of shares in the British East India Company, deposited as collateral
at two-thirds of their face value for a loan of one hundred thousand
dollars. A Philadelphia magnate had hypothecated them for the use of the
ready cash. Young Cowperwood looked at them curiously. "They don't look
like much, do they?" he commented.

"They are worth just four times their face value," said his father,
archly.

Frank reexamined them. "The British East India Company," he read. "Ten
pounds--that's pretty near fifty dollars."

"Forty-eight, thirty-five," commented his father, dryly. "Well, if we
had a bundle of those we wouldn't need to work very hard. You'll notice
there are scarcely any pin-marks on them. They aren't sent around very
much. I don't suppose these have ever been used as collateral before."

Young Cowperwood gave them back after a time, but not without a keen
sense of the vast ramifications of finance. What was the East India
Company? What did it do? His father told him.

At home also he listened to considerable talk of financial investment
and adventure. He heard, for one thing, of a curious character by the
name of Steemberger, a great beef speculator from Virginia, who was
attracted to Philadelphia in those days by the hope of large and easy
credits. Steemberger, so his father said, was close to Nicholas Biddle,
Lardner, and others of the United States Bank, or at least friendly with
them, and seemed to be able to obtain from that organization nearly all
that he asked for. His operations in the purchase of cattle in Virginia,
Ohio, and other States were vast, amounting, in fact, to an entire
monopoly of the business of supplying beef to Eastern cities. He was a
big man, enormous, with a face, his father said, something like that of
a pig; and he wore a high beaver hat and a long frock-coat which hung
loosely about his big chest and stomach. He had managed to force the
price of beef up to thirty cents a pound, causing all the retailers and
consumers to rebel, and this was what made him so conspicuous. He used
to come to the brokerage end of the elder Cowperwood's bank, with as
much as one hundred thousand or two hundred thousand dollars, in twelve
months--post-notes of the United States Bank in denominations of one
thousand, five thousand, and ten thousand dollars. These he would
cash at from ten to twelve per cent. under their face value, having
previously given the United States Bank his own note at four months
for the entire amount. He would take his pay from the Third National
brokerage counter in packages of Virginia, Ohio, and western
Pennsylvania bank-notes at par, because he made his disbursements
principally in those States. The Third National would in the first
place realize a profit of from four to five per cent. on the original
transaction; and as it took the Western bank-notes at a discount, it
also made a profit on those.

There was another man his father talked about--one Francis J. Grund, a
famous newspaper correspondent and lobbyist at Washington, who possessed
the faculty of unearthing secrets of every kind, especially those
relating to financial legislation. The secrets of the President and
the Cabinet, as well as of the Senate and the House of Representatives,
seemed to be open to him. Grund had been about, years before, purchasing
through one or two brokers large amounts of the various kinds of Texas
debt certificates and bonds. The Republic of Texas, in its struggle for
independence from Mexico, had issued bonds and certificates in great
variety, amounting in value to ten or fifteen million dollars. Later,
in connection with the scheme to make Texas a State of the Union, a bill
was passed providing a contribution on the part of the United States of
five million dollars, to be applied to the extinguishment of this old
debt. Grund knew of this, and also of the fact that some of this debt,
owing to the peculiar conditions of issue, was to be paid in full, while
other portions were to be scaled down, and there was to be a false
or pre-arranged failure to pass the bill at one session in order to
frighten off the outsiders who might have heard and begun to buy the old
certificates for profit. He acquainted the Third National Bank with this
fact, and of course the information came to Cowperwood as teller. He
told his wife about it, and so his son, in this roundabout way, heard
it, and his clear, big eyes glistened. He wondered why his father did
not take advantage of the situation and buy some Texas certificates for
himself. Grund, so his father said, and possibly three or four others,
had made over a hundred thousand dollars apiece. It wasn't exactly
legitimate, he seemed to think, and yet it was, too. Why shouldn't such
inside information be rewarded? Somehow, Frank realized that his father
was too honest, too cautious, but when he grew up, he told himself, he
was going to be a broker, or a financier, or a banker, and do some of
these things.

Just at this time there came to the Cowperwoods an uncle who had not
previously appeared in the life of the family. He was a brother of Mrs.
Cowperwood's--Seneca Davis by name--solid, unctuous, five feet ten in
height, with a big, round body, a round, smooth head rather bald, a
clear, ruddy complexion, blue eyes, and what little hair he had of
a sandy hue. He was exceedingly well dressed according to standards
prevailing in those days, indulging in flowered waistcoats, long,
light-colored frock-coats, and the invariable (for a fairly prosperous
man) high hat. Frank was fascinated by him at once. He had been a
planter in Cuba and still owned a big ranch there and could tell him
tales of Cuban life--rebellions, ambuscades, hand-to-hand fighting with
machetes on his own plantation, and things of that sort. He brought
with him a collection of Indian curies, to say nothing of an independent
fortune and several slaves--one, named Manuel, a tall, raw-boned black,
was his constant attendant, a bodyservant, as it were. He shipped raw
sugar from his plantation in boat-loads to the Southwark wharves in
Philadelphia. Frank liked him because he took life in a hearty, jovial
way, rather rough and offhand for this somewhat quiet and reserved
household.

"Why, Nancy Arabella," he said to Mrs Cowperwood on arriving one Sunday
afternoon, and throwing the household into joyous astonishment at his
unexpected and unheralded appearance, "you haven't grown an inch! I
thought when you married old brother Hy here that you were going to
fatten up like your brother. But look at you! I swear to Heaven you
don't weigh five pounds." And he jounced her up and down by the waist,
much to the perturbation of the children, who had never before seen
their mother so familiarly handled.

Henry Cowperwood was exceedingly interested in and pleased at the
arrival of this rather prosperous relative; for twelve years before,
when he was married, Seneca Davis had not taken much notice of him.

"Look at these little putty-faced Philadelphians," he continued, "They
ought to come down to my ranch in Cuba and get tanned up. That would
take away this waxy look." And he pinched the cheek of Anna Adelaide,
now five years old. "I tell you, Henry, you have a rather nice place
here." And he looked at the main room of the rather conventional
three-story house with a critical eye.

Measuring twenty by twenty-four and finished in imitation cherry, with a
set of new Sheraton parlor furniture it presented a quaintly harmonious
aspect. Since Henry had become teller the family had acquired a piano--a
decided luxury in those days--brought from Europe; and it was intended
that Anna Adelaide, when she was old enough, should learn to play. There
were a few uncommon ornaments in the room--a gas chandelier for one
thing, a glass bowl with goldfish in it, some rare and highly polished
shells, and a marble Cupid bearing a basket of flowers. It was summer
time, the windows were open, and the trees outside, with their widely
extended green branches, were pleasantly visible shading the brick
sidewalk. Uncle Seneca strolled out into the back yard.

"Well, this is pleasant enough," he observed, noting a large elm and
seeing that the yard was partially paved with brick and enclosed within
brick walls, up the sides of which vines were climbing. "Where's your
hammock? Don't you string a hammock here in summer? Down on my veranda
at San Pedro I have six or seven."

"We hadn't thought of putting one up because of the neighbors, but it
would be nice," agreed Mrs. Cowperwood. "Henry will have to get one."

"I have two or three in my trunks over at the hotel. My niggers make 'em
down there. I'll send Manuel over with them in the morning."

He plucked at the vines, tweaked Edward's ear, told Joseph, the second
boy, he would bring him an Indian tomahawk, and went back into the
house.

"This is the lad that interests me," he said, after a time, laying a
hand on the shoulder of Frank. "What did you name him in full, Henry?"

"Frank Algernon."

"Well, you might have named him after me. There's something to this boy.
How would you like to come down to Cuba and be a planter, my boy?"

"I'm not so sure that I'd like to," replied the eldest.

"Well, that's straight-spoken. What have you against it?"

"Nothing, except that I don't know anything about it."

"What do you know?"

The boy smiled wisely. "Not very much, I guess."

"Well, what are you interested in?"

"Money!"

"Aha! What's bred in the bone, eh? Get something of that from your
father, eh? Well, that's a good trait. And spoken like a man, too! We'll
hear more about that later. Nancy, you're breeding a financier here, I
think. He talks like one."

He looked at Frank carefully now. There was real force in that sturdy
young body--no doubt of it. Those large, clear gray eyes were full of
intelligence. They indicated much and revealed nothing.

"A smart boy!" he said to Henry, his brother-in-law. "I like his get-up.
You have a bright family."

Henry Cowperwood smiled dryly. This man, if he liked Frank, might do
much for the boy. He might eventually leave him some of his fortune. He
was wealthy and single.

Uncle Seneca became a frequent visitor to the house--he and his negro
body-guard, Manuel, who spoke both English and Spanish, much to the
astonishment of the children; and he took an increasing interest in
Frank.

"When that boy gets old enough to find out what he wants to do, I think
I'll help him to do it," he observed to his sister one day; and she told
him she was very grateful. He talked to Frank about his studies,
and found that he cared little for books or most of the study he was
compelled to pursue. Grammar was an abomination. Literature silly. Latin
was of no use. History--well, it was fairly interesting.

"I like bookkeeping and arithmetic," he observed. "I want to get out and
get to work, though. That's what I want to do."

"You're pretty young, my son," observed his uncle. "You're only how old
now? Fourteen?"

"Thirteen."

"Well, you can't leave school much before sixteen. You'll do better
if you stay until seventeen or eighteen. It can't do you any harm. You
won't be a boy again."

"I don't want to be a boy. I want to get to work."

"Don't go too fast, son. You'll be a man soon enough. You want to be a
banker, do you?"

"Yes, sir!"

"Well, when the time comes, if everything is all right and you've
behaved yourself and you still want to, I'll help you get a start in
business. If I were you and were going to be a banker, I'd first spend
a year or so in some good grain and commission house. There's good
training to be had there. You'll learn a lot that you ought to know.
And, meantime, keep your health and learn all you can. Wherever I am,
you let me know, and I'll write and find out how you've been conducting
yourself."

He gave the boy a ten-dollar gold piece with which to start a
bank-account. And, not strange to say, he liked the whole Cowperwood
household much better for this dynamic, self-sufficient, sterling youth
who was an integral part of it.





Chapter III


It was in his thirteenth year that young Cowperwood entered into his
first business venture. Walking along Front Street one day, a street
of importing and wholesale establishments, he saw an auctioneer's flag
hanging out before a wholesale grocery and from the interior came the
auctioneer's voice: "What am I bid for this exceptional lot of Java
coffee, twenty-two bags all told, which is now selling in the market for
seven dollars and thirty-two cents a bag wholesale? What am I bid? What
am I bid? The whole lot must go as one. What am I bid?"

"Eighteen dollars," suggested a trader standing near the door, more to
start the bidding than anything else. Frank paused.

"Twenty-two!" called another.

"Thirty!" a third. "Thirty-five!" a fourth, and so up to seventy-five,
less than half of what it was worth.

"I'm bid seventy-five! I'm bid seventy-five!" called the auctioneer,
loudly. "Any other offers? Going once at seventy-five; am I offered
eighty? Going twice at seventy-five, and"--he paused, one hand raised
dramatically. Then he brought it down with a slap in the palm of the
other--"sold to Mr. Silas Gregory for seventy-five. Make a note of that,
Jerry," he called to his red-haired, freckle-faced clerk beside him.
Then he turned to another lot of grocery staples--this time starch,
eleven barrels of it.

Young Cowperwood was making a rapid calculation. If, as the auctioneer
said, coffee was worth seven dollars and thirty-two cents a bag in the
open market, and this buyer was getting this coffee for seventy-five
dollars, he was making then and there eighty-six dollars and four cents,
to say nothing of what his profit would be if he sold it at retail. As
he recalled, his mother was paying twenty-eight cents a pound. He drew
nearer, his books tucked under his arm, and watched these operations
closely. The starch, as he soon heard, was valued at ten dollars a
barrel, and it only brought six. Some kegs of vinegar were knocked down
at one-third their value, and so on. He began to wish he could bid; but
he had no money, just a little pocket change. The auctioneer noticed
him standing almost directly under his nose, and was impressed with the
stolidity--solidity--of the boy's expression.

"I am going to offer you now a fine lot of Castile soap--seven cases,
no less--which, as you know, if you know anything about soap, is now
selling at fourteen cents a bar. This soap is worth anywhere at this
moment eleven dollars and seventy-five cents a case. What am I bid?
What am I bid? What am I bid?" He was talking fast in the usual style
of auctioneers, with much unnecessary emphasis; but Cowperwood was not
unduly impressed. He was already rapidly calculating for himself. Seven
cases at eleven dollars and seventy-five cents would be worth just
eighty-two dollars and twenty-five cents; and if it went at half--if it
went at half--

"Twelve dollars," commented one bidder.

"Fifteen," bid another.

"Twenty," called a third.

"Twenty-five," a fourth.

Then it came to dollar raises, for Castile soap was not such a vital
commodity. "Twenty-six." "Twenty-seven." "Twenty-eight." "Twenty-nine."
There was a pause. "Thirty," observed young Cowperwood, decisively.

The auctioneer, a short lean faced, spare man with bushy hair and an
incisive eye, looked at him curiously and almost incredulously but
without pausing. He had, somehow, in spite of himself, been impressed by
the boy's peculiar eye; and now he felt, without knowing why, that the
offer was probably legitimate enough, and that the boy had the money. He
might be the son of a grocer.

"I'm bid thirty! I'm bid thirty! I'm bid thirty for this fine lot of
Castile soap. It's a fine lot. It's worth fourteen cents a bar. Will
any one bid thirty-one? Will any one bid thirty-one? Will any one bid
thirty-one?"

"Thirty-one," said a voice.

"Thirty-two," replied Cowperwood. The same process was repeated.

"I'm bid thirty-two! I'm bid thirty-two! I'm bid thirty-two! Will
anybody bid thirty-three? It's fine soap. Seven cases of fine Castile
soap. Will anybody bid thirty-three?"

Young Cowperwood's mind was working. He had no money with him; but his
father was teller of the Third National Bank, and he could quote him as
reference. He could sell all of his soap to the family grocer, surely;
or, if not, to other grocers. Other people were anxious to get this soap
at this price. Why not he?

The auctioneer paused.

"Thirty-two once! Am I bid thirty-three? Thirty-two twice! Am I bid
thirty-three? Thirty-two three times! Seven fine cases of soap. Am I bid
anything more? Once, twice! Three times! Am I bid anything more?"--his
hand was up again--"and sold to Mr.--?" He leaned over and looked
curiously into the face of his young bidder.

"Frank Cowperwood, son of the teller of the Third National Bank,"
replied the boy, decisively.

"Oh, yes," said the man, fixed by his glance.

"Will you wait while I run up to the bank and get the money?"

"Yes. Don't be gone long. If you're not here in an hour I'll sell it
again."

Young Cowperwood made no reply. He hurried out and ran fast; first, to
his mother's grocer, whose store was within a block of his home.

Thirty feet from the door he slowed up, put on a nonchalant air, and
strolling in, looked about for Castile soap. There it was, the same
kind, displayed in a box and looking just as his soap looked.

"How much is this a bar, Mr. Dalrymple?" he inquired.

"Sixteen cents," replied that worthy.

"If I could sell you seven boxes for sixty-two dollars just like this,
would you take them?"

"The same soap?"

"Yes, sir."

Mr. Dalrymple calculated a moment.

"Yes, I think I would," he replied, cautiously.

"Would you pay me to-day?"

"I'd give you my note for it. Where is the soap?"

He was perplexed and somewhat astonished by this unexpected proposition
on the part of his neighbor's son. He knew Mr. Cowperwood well--and
Frank also.

"Will you take it if I bring it to you to-day?"

"Yes, I will," he replied. "Are you going into the soap business?"

"No. But I know where I can get some of that soap cheap."

He hurried out again and ran to his father's bank. It was after banking
hours; but he knew how to get in, and he knew that his father would be
glad to see him make thirty dollars. He only wanted to borrow the money
for a day.

"What's the trouble, Frank?" asked his father, looking up from his desk
when he appeared, breathless and red faced.

"I want you to loan me thirty-two dollars! Will you?"

"Why, yes, I might. What do you want to do with it?"

"I want to buy some soap--seven boxes of Castile soap. I know where I
can get it and sell it. Mr. Dalrymple will take it. He's already offered
me sixty-two for it. I can get it for thirty-two. Will you let me have
the money? I've got to run back and pay the auctioneer."

His father smiled. This was the most business-like attitude he had seen
his son manifest. He was so keen, so alert for a boy of thirteen.

"Why, Frank," he said, going over to a drawer where some bills were,
"are you going to become a financier already? You're sure you're not
going to lose on this? You know what you're doing, do you?"

"You let me have the money, father, will you?" he pleaded. "I'll show
you in a little bit. Just let me have it. You can trust me."

He was like a young hound on the scent of game. His father could not
resist his appeal.

"Why, certainly, Frank," he replied. "I'll trust you." And he counted
out six five-dollar certificates of the Third National's own issue and
two ones. "There you are."

Frank ran out of the building with a briefly spoken thanks and returned
to the auction room as fast as his legs would carry him. When he came
in, sugar was being auctioned. He made his way to the auctioneer's
clerk.

"I want to pay for that soap," he suggested.

"Now?"

"Yes. Will you give me a receipt?"

"Yep."

"Do you deliver this?"

"No. No delivery. You have to take it away in twenty-four hours."

That difficulty did not trouble him.

"All right," he said, and pocketed his paper testimony of purchase.

The auctioneer watched him as he went out. In half an hour he was back
with a drayman--an idle levee-wharf hanger-on who was waiting for a job.

Frank had bargained with him to deliver the soap for sixty cents. In
still another half-hour he was before the door of the astonished Mr.
Dalrymple whom he had come out and look at the boxes before attempting
to remove them. His plan was to have them carried on to his own home
if the operation for any reason failed to go through. Though it was his
first great venture, he was cool as glass.

"Yes," said Mr. Dalrymple, scratching his gray head reflectively. "Yes,
that's the same soap. I'll take it. I'll be as good as my word. Where'd
you get it, Frank?"

"At Bixom's auction up here," he replied, frankly and blandly.

Mr. Dalrymple had the drayman bring in the soap; and after some
formality--because the agent in this case was a boy--made out his note
at thirty days and gave it to him.

Frank thanked him and pocketed the note. He decided to go back to his
father's bank and discount it, as he had seen others doing, thereby
paying his father back and getting his own profit in ready money. It
couldn't be done ordinarily on any day after business hours; but his
father would make an exception in his case.

He hurried back, whistling; and his father glanced up smiling when he
came in.

"Well, Frank, how'd you make out?" he asked.

"Here's a note at thirty days," he said, producing the paper Dalrymple
had given him. "Do you want to discount that for me? You can take your
thirty-two out of that."

His father examined it closely. "Sixty-two dollars!" he observed. "Mr.
Dalrymple! That's good paper! Yes, I can. It will cost you ten per
cent.," he added, jestingly. "Why don't you just hold it, though? I'll
let you have the thirty-two dollars until the end of the month."

"Oh, no," said his son, "you discount it and take your money. I may want
mine."

His father smiled at his business-like air. "All right," he said. "I'll
fix it to-morrow. Tell me just how you did this." And his son told him.

At seven o'clock that evening Frank's mother heard about it, and in due
time Uncle Seneca.

"What'd I tell you, Cowperwood?" he asked. "He has stuff in him, that
youngster. Look out for him."

Mrs. Cowperwood looked at her boy curiously at dinner. Was this the
son she had nursed at her bosom not so very long before? Surely he was
developing rapidly.

"Well, Frank, I hope you can do that often," she said.

"I hope so, too, ma," was his rather noncommittal reply.

Auction sales were not to be discovered every day, however, and his home
grocer was only open to one such transaction in a reasonable period of
time, but from the very first young Cowperwood knew how to make money.
He took subscriptions for a boys' paper; handled the agency for the sale
of a new kind of ice-skate, and once organized a band of neighborhood
youths into a union for the purpose of purchasing their summer straw
hats at wholesale. It was not his idea that he could get rich by saving.
From the first he had the notion that liberal spending was better, and
that somehow he would get along.

It was in this year, or a little earlier, that he began to take an
interest in girls. He had from the first a keen eye for the beautiful
among them; and, being good-looking and magnetic himself, it was not
difficult for him to attract the sympathetic interest of those in whom
he was interested. A twelve-year old girl, Patience Barlow, who lived
further up the street, was the first to attract his attention or be
attracted by him. Black hair and snapping black eyes were her portion,
with pretty pigtails down her back, and dainty feet and ankles to match
a dainty figure. She was a Quakeress, the daughter of Quaker parents,
wearing a demure little bonnet. Her disposition, however, was vivacious,
and she liked this self-reliant, self-sufficient, straight-spoken boy.
One day, after an exchange of glances from time to time, he said, with a
smile and the courage that was innate in him: "You live up my way, don't
you?"

"Yes," she replied, a little flustered--this last manifested in a
nervous swinging of her school-bag--"I live at number one-forty-one."

"I know the house," he said. "I've seen you go in there. You go to the
same school my sister does, don't you? Aren't you Patience Barlow?" He
had heard some of the boys speak her name. "Yes. How do you know?"

"Oh, I've heard," he smiled. "I've seen you. Do you like licorice?"

He fished in his coat and pulled out some fresh sticks that were sold at
the time.

"Thank you," she said, sweetly, taking one.

"It isn't very good. I've been carrying it a long time. I had some taffy
the other day."

"Oh, it's all right," she replied, chewing the end of hers.

"Don't you know my sister, Anna Cowperwood?" he recurred, by way of
self-introduction. "She's in a lower grade than you are, but I thought
maybe you might have seen her."

"I think I know who she is. I've seen her coming home from school."

"I live right over there," he confided, pointing to his own home as he
drew near to it, as if she didn't know. "I'll see you around here now, I
guess."

"Do you know Ruth Merriam?" she asked, when he was about ready to turn
off into the cobblestone road to reach his own door.

"No, why?"

"She's giving a party next Tuesday," she volunteered, seemingly
pointlessly, but only seemingly.

"Where does she live?"

"There in twenty-eight."

"I'd like to go," he affirmed, warmly, as he swung away from her.

"Maybe she'll ask you," she called back, growing more courageous as the
distance between them widened. "I'll ask her."

"Thanks," he smiled.

And she began to run gayly onward.

He looked after her with a smiling face. She was very pretty. He felt
a keen desire to kiss her, and what might transpire at Ruth Merriam's
party rose vividly before his eyes.

This was just one of the early love affairs, or puppy loves, that held
his mind from time to time in the mixture of after events. Patience
Barlow was kissed by him in secret ways many times before he found
another girl. She and others of the street ran out to play in the snow
of a winter's night, or lingered after dusk before her own door when the
days grew dark early. It was so easy to catch and kiss her then, and
to talk to her foolishly at parties. Then came Dora Fitler, when he was
sixteen years old and she was fourteen; and Marjorie Stafford, when
he was seventeen and she was fifteen. Dora Fitter was a brunette, and
Marjorie Stafford was as fair as the morning, with bright-red cheeks,
bluish-gray eyes, and flaxen hair, and as plump as a partridge.

It was at seventeen that he decided to leave school. He had not
graduated. He had only finished the third year in high school; but he
had had enough. Ever since his thirteenth year his mind had been on
finance; that is, in the form in which he saw it manifested in Third
Street. There had been odd things which he had been able to do to earn
a little money now and then. His Uncle Seneca had allowed him to act
as assistant weigher at the sugar-docks in Southwark, where
three-hundred-pound bags were weighed into the government bonded
warehouses under the eyes of United States inspectors. In certain
emergencies he was called to assist his father, and was paid for it. He
even made an arrangement with Mr. Dalrymple to assist him on Saturdays;
but when his father became cashier of his bank, receiving an income
of four thousand dollars a year, shortly after Frank had reached his
fifteenth year, it was self-evident that Frank could no longer continue
in such lowly employment.

Just at this time his Uncle Seneca, again back in Philadelphia and
stouter and more domineering than ever, said to him one day:

"Now, Frank, if you're ready for it, I think I know where there's a good
opening for you. There won't be any salary in it for the first year, but
if you mind your p's and q's, they'll probably give you something as a
gift at the end of that time. Do you know of Henry Waterman & Company
down in Second Street?"

"I've seen their place."

"Well, they tell me they might make a place for you as a bookkeeper.
They're brokers in a way--grain and commission men. You say you want
to get in that line. When school's out, you go down and see Mr.
Waterman--tell him I sent you, and he'll make a place for you, I think.
Let me know how you come out."

Uncle Seneca was married now, having, because of his wealth, attracted
the attention of a poor but ambitious Philadelphia society matron;
and because of this the general connections of the Cowperwoods were
considered vastly improved. Henry Cowperwood was planning to move with
his family rather far out on North Front Street, which commanded at that
time a beautiful view of the river and was witnessing the construction
of some charming dwellings. His four thousand dollars a year in these
pre-Civil-War times was considerable. He was making what he considered
judicious and conservative investments and because of his cautious,
conservative, clock-like conduct it was thought he might reasonably
expect some day to be vice-president and possibly president, of his
bank.

This offer of Uncle Seneca to get him in with Waterman & Company seemed
to Frank just the thing to start him off right. So he reported to
that organization at 74 South Second Street one day in June, and
was cordially received by Mr. Henry Waterman, Sr. There was, he soon
learned, a Henry Waterman, Jr., a young man of twenty-five, and a George
Waterman, a brother, aged fifty, who was the confidential inside man.
Henry Waterman, Sr., a man of fifty-five years of age, was the general
head of the organization, inside and out--traveling about the nearby
territory to see customers when that was necessary, coming into final
counsel in cases where his brother could not adjust matters, suggesting
and advising new ventures which his associates and hirelings carried
out. He was, to look at, a phlegmatic type of man--short, stout,
wrinkled about the eyes, rather protuberant as to stomach, red-necked,
red-faced, the least bit popeyed, but shrewd, kindly, good-natured, and
witty. He had, because of his naturally common-sense ideas and rather
pleasing disposition built up a sound and successful business here. He
was getting strong in years and would gladly have welcomed the hearty
cooperation of his son, if the latter had been entirely suited to the
business.

He was not, however. Not as democratic, as quick-witted, or as pleased
with the work in hand as was his father, the business actually offended
him. And if the trade had been left to his care, it would have rapidly
disappeared. His father foresaw this, was grieved, and was hoping
some young man would eventually appear who would be interested in the
business, handle it in the same spirit in which it had been handled, and
who would not crowd his son out.

Then came young Cowperwood, spoken of to him by Seneca Davis. He looked
him over critically. Yes, this boy might do, he thought. There was
something easy and sufficient about him. He did not appear to be in the
least flustered or disturbed. He knew how to keep books, he said, though
he knew nothing of the details of the grain and commission business. It
was interesting to him. He would like to try it.

"I like that fellow," Henry Waterman confided to his brother the moment
Frank had gone with instructions to report the following morning.
"There's something to him. He's the cleanest, briskest, most alive thing
that's walked in here in many a day."

"Yes," said George, a much leaner and slightly taller man, with
dark, blurry, reflective eyes and a thin, largely vanished growth of
brownish-black hair which contrasted strangely with the egg-shaped
whiteness of his bald head. "Yes, he's a nice young man. It's a wonder
his father don't take him in his bank."

"Well, he may not be able to," said his brother. "He's only the cashier
there."

"That's right."

"Well, we'll give him a trial. I bet anything he makes good. He's a
likely-looking youth."

Henry got up and walked out into the main entrance looking into Second
Street. The cool cobble pavements, shaded from the eastern sun by the
wall of buildings on the east--of which his was a part--the noisy trucks
and drays, the busy crowds hurrying to and fro, pleased him. He looked
at the buildings over the way--all three and four stories, and largely
of gray stone and crowded with life--and thanked his stars that he
had originally located in so prosperous a neighborhood. If he had only
brought more property at the time he bought this!

"I wish that Cowperwood boy would turn out to be the kind of man I
want," he observed to himself, meditatively. "He could save me a lot of
running these days."

Curiously, after only three or four minutes of conversation with the
boy, he sensed this marked quality of efficiency. Something told him he
would do well.





Chapter IV


The appearance of Frank Cowperwood at this time was, to say the least,
prepossessing and satisfactory. Nature had destined him to be about five
feet ten inches tall. His head was large, shapely, notably commercial in
aspect, thickly covered with crisp, dark-brown hair and fixed on a pair
of square shoulders and a stocky body. Already his eyes had the look
that subtle years of thought bring. They were inscrutable. You could
tell nothing by his eyes. He walked with a light, confident, springy
step. Life had given him no severe shocks nor rude awakenings. He had
not been compelled to suffer illness or pain or deprivation of any kind.
He saw people richer than himself, but he hoped to be rich. His family
was respected, his father well placed. He owed no man anything. Once he
had let a small note of his become overdue at the bank, but his father
raised such a row that he never forgot it. "I would rather crawl on
my hands and knees than let my paper go to protest," the old gentleman
observed; and this fixed in his mind what scarcely needed to be so
sharply emphasized--the significance of credit. No paper of his ever
went to protest or became overdue after that through any negligence of
his.

He turned out to be the most efficient clerk that the house of Waterman
& Co. had ever known. They put him on the books at first as assistant
bookkeeper, vice Mr. Thomas Trixler, dismissed, and in two weeks George
said: "Why don't we make Cowperwood head bookkeeper? He knows more in a
minute than that fellow Sampson will ever know."

"All right, make the transfer, George, but don't fuss so. He won't be a
bookkeeper long, though. I want to see if he can't handle some of these
transfers for me after a bit."

The books of Messrs. Waterman & Co., though fairly complicated, were
child's play to Frank. He went through them with an ease and rapidity
which surprised his erstwhile superior, Mr. Sampson.

"Why, that fellow," Sampson told another clerk on the first day he had
seen Cowperwood work, "he's too brisk. He's going to make a bad break. I
know that kind. Wait a little bit until we get one of those rush credit
and transfer days." But the bad break Mr. Sampson anticipated did not
materialize. In less than a week Cowperwood knew the financial condition
of the Messrs. Waterman as well as they did--better--to a dollar. He
knew how their accounts were distributed; from what section they drew
the most business; who sent poor produce and good--the varying prices
for a year told that. To satisfy himself he ran back over certain
accounts in the ledger, verifying his suspicions. Bookkeeping did not
interest him except as a record, a demonstration of a firm's life. He
knew he would not do this long. Something else would happen; but he saw
instantly what the grain and commission business was--every detail of
it. He saw where, for want of greater activity in offering the goods
consigned--quicker communication with shippers and buyers, a better
working agreement with surrounding commission men--this house, or,
rather, its customers, for it had nothing, endured severe losses. A man
would ship a tow-boat or a car-load of fruit or vegetables against a
supposedly rising or stable market; but if ten other men did the same
thing at the same time, or other commission men were flooded with
fruit or vegetables, and there was no way of disposing of them within
a reasonable time, the price had to fall. Every day was bringing its
special consignments. It instantly occurred to him that he would be
of much more use to the house as an outside man disposing of heavy
shipments, but he hesitated to say anything so soon. More than likely,
things would adjust themselves shortly.

The Watermans, Henry and George, were greatly pleased with the way
he handled their accounts. There was a sense of security in his very
presence. He soon began to call Brother George's attention to the
condition of certain accounts, making suggestions as to their possible
liquidation or discontinuance, which pleased that individual greatly. He
saw a way of lightening his own labors through the intelligence of
this youth; while at the same time developing a sense of pleasant
companionship with him.

Brother Henry was for trying him on the outside. It was not always
possible to fill the orders with the stock on hand, and somebody had to
go into the street or the Exchange to buy and usually he did this.
One morning, when way-bills indicated a probable glut of flour and a
shortage of grain--Frank saw it first--the elder Waterman called him
into his office and said:

"Frank, I wish you would see what you can do with this condition that
confronts us on the street. By to-morrow we're going to be overcrowded
with flour. We can't be paying storage charges, and our orders won't eat
it up. We're short on grain. Maybe you could trade out the flour to some
of those brokers and get me enough grain to fill these orders."

"I'd like to try," said his employee.

He knew from his books where the various commission-houses were. He knew
what the local merchants' exchange, and the various commission-merchants
who dealt in these things, had to offer. This was the thing he liked to
do--adjust a trade difficulty of this nature. It was pleasant to be out
in the air again, to be going from door to door. He objected to desk
work and pen work and poring over books. As he said in later years, his
brain was his office. He hurried to the principal commission-merchants,
learning what the state of the flour market was, and offering his
surplus at the very rate he would have expected to get for it if
there had been no prospective glut. Did they want to buy for immediate
delivery (forty-eight hours being immediate) six hundred barrels of
prime flour? He would offer it at nine dollars straight, in the barrel.
They did not. He offered it in fractions, and some agreed to take one
portion, and some another. In about an hour he was all secure on this
save one lot of two hundred barrels, which he decided to offer in one
lump to a famous operator named Genderman with whom his firm did no
business. The latter, a big man with curly gray hair, a gnarled and
yet pudgy face, and little eyes that peeked out shrewdly through fat
eyelids, looked at Cowperwood curiously when he came in.

"What's your name, young man?" he asked, leaning back in his wooden
chair.

"Cowperwood."

"So you work for Waterman & Company? You want to make a record, no
doubt. That's why you came to me?"

Cowperwood merely smiled.

"Well, I'll take your flour. I need it. Bill it to me."

Cowperwood hurried out. He went direct to a firm of brokers in Walnut
Street, with whom his firm dealt, and had them bid in the grain he
needed at prevailing rates. Then he returned to the office.

"Well," said Henry Waterman, when he reported, "you did that quick. Sold
old Genderman two hundred barrels direct, did you? That's doing pretty
well. He isn't on our books, is he?"

"No, sir."

"I thought not. Well, if you can do that sort of work on the street you
won't be on the books long."

Thereafter, in the course of time, Frank became a familiar figure in
the commission district and on 'change (the Produce Exchange), striking
balances for his employer, picking up odd lots of things they needed,
soliciting new customers, breaking gluts by disposing of odd lots
in unexpected quarters. Indeed the Watermans were astonished at
his facility in this respect. He had an uncanny faculty for getting
appreciative hearings, making friends, being introduced into new realms.
New life began to flow through the old channels of the Waterman company.
Their customers were better satisfied. George was for sending him out
into the rural districts to drum up trade, and this was eventually done.

Near Christmas-time Henry said to George: "We'll have to make Cowperwood
a liberal present. He hasn't any salary. How would five hundred dollars
do?"

"That's pretty much, seeing the way times are, but I guess he's worth
it. He's certainly done everything we've expected, and more. He's cut
out for this business."

"What does he say about it? Do you ever hear him say whether he's
satisfied?"

"Oh, he likes it pretty much, I guess. You see him as much as I do."

"Well, we'll make it five hundred. That fellow wouldn't make a bad
partner in this business some day. He has the real knack for it. You see
that he gets the five hundred dollars with a word from both of us."

So the night before Christmas, as Cowperwood was looking over some
way-bills and certificates of consignment preparatory to leaving all in
order for the intervening holiday, George Waterman came to his desk.

"Hard at it," he said, standing under the flaring gaslight and looking
at his brisk employee with great satisfaction.

It was early evening, and the snow was making a speckled pattern through
the windows in front.

"Just a few points before I wind up," smiled Cowperwood.

"My brother and I have been especially pleased with the way you have
handled the work here during the past six months. We wanted to make
some acknowledgment, and we thought about five hundred dollars would be
right. Beginning January first we'll give you a regular salary of thirty
dollars a week."

"I'm certainly much obliged to you," said Frank. "I didn't expect that
much. It's a good deal. I've learned considerable here that I'm glad to
know."

"Oh, don't mention it. We know you've earned it. You can stay with us as
long as you like. We're glad to have you with us."

Cowperwood smiled his hearty, genial smile. He was feeling very
comfortable under this evidence of approval. He looked bright and cheery
in his well-made clothes of English tweed.

On the way home that evening he speculated as to the nature of this
business. He knew he wasn't going to stay there long, even in spite of
this gift and promise of salary. They were grateful, of course; but
why shouldn't they be? He was efficient, he knew that; under him things
moved smoothly. It never occurred to him that he belonged in the realm
of clerkdom. Those people were the kind of beings who ought to work for
him, and who would. There was nothing savage in his attitude, no rage
against fate, no dark fear of failure. These two men he worked for
were already nothing more than characters in his eyes--their
business significated itself. He could see their weaknesses and their
shortcomings as a much older man might have viewed a boy's.

After dinner that evening, before leaving to call on his girl, Marjorie
Stafford, he told his father of the gift of five hundred dollars and the
promised salary.

"That's splendid," said the older man. "You're doing better than I
thought. I suppose you'll stay there."

"No, I won't. I think I'll quit sometime next year."

"Why?"

"Well, it isn't exactly what I want to do. It's all right, but I'd
rather try my hand at brokerage, I think. That appeals to me."

"Don't you think you are doing them an injustice not to tell them?"

"Not at all. They need me." All the while surveying himself in a mirror,
straightening his tie and adjusting his coat.

"Have you told your mother?"

"No. I'm going to do it now."

He went out into the dining-room, where his mother was, and slipping his
arms around her little body, said: "What do you think, Mammy?"

"Well, what?" she asked, looking affectionately into his eyes.

"I got five hundred dollars to-night, and I get thirty a week next year.
What do you want for Christmas?"

"You don't say! Isn't that nice! Isn't that fine! They must like you.
You're getting to be quite a man, aren't you?"

"What do you want for Christmas?"

"Nothing. I don't want anything. I have my children."

He smiled. "All right. Then nothing it is."

But she knew he would buy her something.

He went out, pausing at the door to grab playfully at his sister's
waist, and saying that he'd be back about midnight, hurried to
Marjorie's house, because he had promised to take her to a show.

"Anything you want for Christmas this year, Margy?" he asked, after
kissing her in the dimly-lighted hall. "I got five hundred to-night."

She was an innocent little thing, only fifteen, no guile, no shrewdness.

"Oh, you needn't get me anything."

"Needn't I?" he asked, squeezing her waist and kissing her mouth again.

It was fine to be getting on this way in the world and having such a
good time.





Chapter V


The following October, having passed his eighteenth year by nearly six
months, and feeling sure that he would never want anything to do with
the grain and commission business as conducted by the Waterman Company,
Cowperwood decided to sever his relations with them and enter the employ
of Tighe & Company, bankers and brokers.

Cowperwood's meeting with Tighe & Company had come about in the ordinary
pursuance of his duties as outside man for Waterman & Company. From the
first Mr. Tighe took a keen interest in this subtle young emissary.

"How's business with you people?" he would ask, genially; or, "Find that
you're getting many I.O.U.'s these days?"

Because of the unsettled condition of the country, the over-inflation of
securities, the slavery agitation, and so forth, there were prospects
of hard times. And Tighe--he could not have told you why--was convinced
that this young man was worth talking to in regard to all this. He was
not really old enough to know, and yet he did know.

"Oh, things are going pretty well with us, thank you, Mr. Tighe,"
Cowperwood would answer.

"I tell you," he said to Cowperwood one morning, "this slavery
agitation, if it doesn't stop, is going to cause trouble."

A negro slave belonging to a visitor from Cuba had just been abducted
and set free, because the laws of Pennsylvania made freedom the right of
any negro brought into the state, even though in transit only to another
portion of the country, and there was great excitement because of it.
Several persons had been arrested, and the newspapers were discussing it
roundly.

"I don't think the South is going to stand for this thing. It's making
trouble in our business, and it must be doing the same thing for others.
We'll have secession here, sure as fate, one of these days." He talked
with the vaguest suggestion of a brogue.

"It's coming, I think," said Cowperwood, quietly. "It can't be healed,
in my judgment. The negro isn't worth all this excitement, but they'll
go on agitating for him--emotional people always do this. They haven't
anything else to do. It's hurting our Southern trade."

"I thought so. That's what people tell me."

He turned to a new customer as young Cowperwood went out, but again
the boy struck him as being inexpressibly sound and deep-thinking on
financial matters. "If that young fellow wanted a place, I'd give it to
him," he thought.

Finally, one day he said to him: "How would you like to try your hand at
being a floor man for me in 'change? I need a young man here. One of my
clerks is leaving."

"I'd like it," replied Cowperwood, smiling and looking intensely
gratified. "I had thought of speaking to you myself some time."

"Well, if you're ready and can make the change, the place is open. Come
any time you like."

"I'll have to give a reasonable notice at the other place," Cowperwood
said, quietly. "Would you mind waiting a week or two?"

"Not at all. It isn't as important as that. Come as soon as you can
straighten things out. I don't want to inconvenience your employers."

It was only two weeks later that Frank took his departure from Waterman
& Company, interested and yet in no way flustered by his new prospects.
And great was the grief of Mr. George Waterman. As for Mr. Henry
Waterman, he was actually irritated by this defection.

"Why, I thought," he exclaimed, vigorously, when informed by Cowperwood
of his decision, "that you liked the business. Is it a matter of
salary?"

"No, not at all, Mr. Waterman. It's just that I want to get into the
straight-out brokerage business."

"Well, that certainly is too bad. I'm sorry. I don't want to urge you
against your own best interests. You know what you are doing. But George
and I had about agreed to offer you an interest in this thing after a
bit. Now you're picking up and leaving. Why, damn it, man, there's good
money in this business."

"I know it," smiled Cowperwood, "but I don't like it. I have other plans
in view. I'll never be a grain and commission man." Mr. Henry Waterman
could scarcely understand why obvious success in this field did not
interest him. He feared the effect of his departure on the business.

And once the change was made Cowperwood was convinced that this new work
was more suited to him in every way--as easy and more profitable, of
course. In the first place, the firm of Tighe & Co., unlike that of
Waterman & Co., was located in a handsome green-gray stone building
at 66 South Third Street, in what was then, and for a number of years
afterward, the heart of the financial district. Great institutions of
national and international import and repute were near at hand--Drexel
& Co., Edward Clark & Co., the Third National Bank, the First National
Bank, the Stock Exchange, and similar institutions. Almost a score of
smaller banks and brokerage firms were also in the vicinity. Edward
Tighe, the head and brains of this concern, was a Boston Irishman,
the son of an immigrant who had flourished and done well in that
conservative city. He had come to Philadelphia to interest himself in
the speculative life there. "Sure, it's a right good place for those of
us who are awake," he told his friends, with a slight Irish accent, and
he considered himself very much awake. He was a medium-tall man, not
very stout, slightly and prematurely gray, and with a manner which was
as lively and good-natured as it was combative and self-reliant. His
upper lip was ornamented by a short, gray mustache.

"May heaven preserve me," he said, not long after he came there, "these
Pennsylvanians never pay for anything they can issue bonds for." It
was the period when Pennsylvania's credit, and for that matter
Philadelphia's, was very bad in spite of its great wealth. "If there's
ever a war there'll be battalions of Pennsylvanians marching around
offering notes for their meals. If I could just live long enough I could
get rich buyin' up Pennsylvania notes and bonds. I think they'll pay
some time; but, my God, they're mortal slow! I'll be dead before the
State government will ever catch up on the interest they owe me now."

It was true. The condition of the finances of the state and city was
most reprehensible. Both State and city were rich enough; but there were
so many schemes for looting the treasury in both instances that when any
new work had to be undertaken bonds were necessarily issued to raise the
money. These bonds, or warrants, as they were called, pledged interest
at six per cent.; but when the interest fell due, instead of paying it,
the city or State treasurer, as the case might be, stamped the same with
the date of presentation, and the warrant then bore interest for not
only its original face value, but the amount then due in interest. In
other words, it was being slowly compounded. But this did not help
the man who wanted to raise money, for as security they could not be
hypothecated for more than seventy per cent. of their market value, and
they were not selling at par, but at ninety. A man might buy or accept
them in foreclosure, but he had a long wait. Also, in the final payment
of most of them favoritism ruled, for it was only when the treasurer
knew that certain warrants were in the hands of "a friend" that he would
advertise that such and such warrants--those particular ones that he
knew about--would be paid.

What was more, the money system of the United States was only then
beginning slowly to emerge from something approximating chaos to
something more nearly approaching order. The United States Bank, of
which Nicholas Biddle was the progenitor, had gone completely in 1841,
and the United States Treasury with its subtreasury system had come
in 1846; but still there were many, many wildcat banks, sufficient
in number to make the average exchange-counter broker a walking
encyclopedia of solvent and insolvent institutions. Still, things
were slowly improving, for the telegraph had facilitated stock-market
quotations, not only between New York, Boston, and Philadelphia, but
between a local broker's office in Philadelphia and his stock
exchange. In other words, the short private wire had been introduced.
Communication was quicker and freer, and daily grew better.

Railroads had been built to the South, East, North, and West. There was
as yet no stock-ticker and no telephone, and the clearing-house had only
recently been thought of in New York, and had not yet been introduced in
Philadelphia. Instead of a clearing-house service, messengers ran daily
between banks and brokerage firms, balancing accounts on pass-books,
exchanging bills, and, once a week, transferring the gold coin, which
was the only thing that could be accepted for balances due, since there
was no stable national currency. "On 'change," when the gong struck
announcing the close of the day's business, a company of young men,
known as "settlement clerks," after a system borrowed from London,
gathered in the center of the room and compared or gathered the various
trades of the day in a ring, thus eliminating all those sales and
resales between certain firms which naturally canceled each other. They
carried long account books, and called out the transactions--"Delaware
and Maryland sold to Beaumont and Company," "Delware and Maryland sold
to Tighe and Company," and so on. This simplified the bookkeeping of
the various firms, and made for quicker and more stirring commercial
transactions.

Seats "on 'change" sold for two thousand dollars each. The members of
the exchange had just passed rules limiting the trading to the hours
between ten and three (before this they had been any time between
morning and midnight), and had fixed the rates at which brokers could do
business, in the face of cut-throat schemes which had previously held.
Severe penalties were fixed for those who failed to obey. In other
words, things were shaping up for a great 'change business, and Edward
Tighe felt, with other brokers, that there was a great future ahead.





Chapter VI


The Cowperwood family was by this time established in its new and larger
and more tastefully furnished house on North Front Street, facing the
river. The house was four stories tall and stood twenty-five feet on the
street front, without a yard.

Here the family began to entertain in a small way, and there came to see
them, now and then, representatives of the various interests that
Henry Cowperwood had encountered in his upward climb to the position
of cashier. It was not a very distinguished company, but it included a
number of people who were about as successful as himself--heads of
small businesses who traded at his bank, dealers in dry-goods, leather,
groceries (wholesale), and grain. The children had come to have
intimacies of their own. Now and then, because of church connections,
Mrs. Cowperwood ventured to have an afternoon tea or reception, at which
even Cowperwood attempted the gallant in so far as to stand about in a
genially foolish way and greet those whom his wife had invited. And so
long as he could maintain his gravity very solemnly and greet people
without being required to say much, it was not too painful for him.
Singing was indulged in at times, a little dancing on occasion, and
there was considerably more "company to dinner," informally, than there
had been previously.

And here it was, during the first year of the new life in this house,
that Frank met a certain Mrs. Semple, who interested him greatly. Her
husband had a pretentious shoe store on Chestnut Street, near Third, and
was planning to open a second one farther out on the same street.

The occasion of the meeting was an evening call on the part of the
Semples, Mr. Semple being desirous of talking with Henry Cowperwood
concerning a new transportation feature which was then entering the
world--namely, street-cars. A tentative line, incorporated by the North
Pennsylvania Railway Company, had been put into operation on a mile and
a half of tracks extending from Willow Street along Front to Germantown
Road, and thence by various streets to what was then known as the
Cohocksink Depot; and it was thought that in time this mode of
locomotion might drive out the hundreds of omnibuses which now crowded
and made impassable the downtown streets. Young Cowperwood had been
greatly interested from the start. Railway transportation, as a whole,
interested him, anyway, but this particular phase was most fascinating.
It was already creating widespread discussion, and he, with others, had
gone to see it. A strange but interesting new type of car, fourteen feet
long, seven feet wide, and nearly the same height, running on small
iron car-wheels, was giving great satisfaction as being quieter
and easier-riding than omnibuses; and Alfred Semple was privately
considering investing in another proposed line which, if it could secure
a franchise from the legislature, was to run on Fifth and Sixth streets.

Cowperwood, Senior, saw a great future for this thing; but he did not
see as yet how the capital was to be raised for it. Frank believed that
Tighe & Co. should attempt to become the selling agents of this new
stock of the Fifth and Sixth Street Company in the event it succeeded
in getting a franchise. He understood that a company was already formed,
that a large amount of stock was to be issued against the prospective
franchise, and that these shares were to be sold at five dollars,
as against an ultimate par value of one hundred. He wished he had
sufficient money to take a large block of them.

Meanwhile, Lillian Semple caught and held his interest. Just what it was
about her that attracted him at this age it would be hard to say,
for she was really not suited to him emotionally, intellectually, or
otherwise. He was not without experience with women or girls, and
still held a tentative relationship with Marjorie Stafford; but Lillian
Semple, in spite of the fact that she was married and that he could have
legitimate interest in her, seemed not wiser and saner, but more worth
while. She was twenty-four as opposed to Frank's nineteen, but still
young enough in her thoughts and looks to appear of his own age. She was
slightly taller than he--though he was now his full height (five feet
ten and one-half inches)--and, despite her height, shapely, artistic
in form and feature, and with a certain unconscious placidity of soul,
which came more from lack of understanding than from force of character.
Her hair was the color of a dried English walnut, rich and plentiful,
and her complexion waxen--cream wax---with lips of faint pink, and eyes
that varied from gray to blue and from gray to brown, according to the
light in which you saw them. Her hands were thin and shapely, her nose
straight, her face artistically narrow. She was not brilliant,
not active, but rather peaceful and statuesque without knowing it.
Cowperwood was carried away by her appearance. Her beauty measured up to
his present sense of the artistic. She was lovely, he thought--gracious,
dignified. If he could have his choice of a wife, this was the kind of a
girl he would like to have.

As yet, Cowperwood's judgment of women was temperamental rather than
intellectual. Engrossed as he was by his desire for wealth, prestige,
dominance, he was confused, if not chastened by considerations relating
to position, presentability and the like. None the less, the homely
woman meant nothing to him. And the passionate woman meant much. He
heard family discussions of this and that sacrificial soul among women,
as well as among men--women who toiled and slaved for their husbands
or children, or both, who gave way to relatives or friends in crises
or crucial moments, because it was right and kind to do so--but
somehow these stories did not appeal to him. He preferred to think of
people--even women--as honestly, frankly self-interested. He could
not have told you why. People seemed foolish, or at the best very
unfortunate not to know what to do in all circumstances and how to
protect themselves. There was great talk concerning morality, much
praise of virtue and decency, and much lifting of hands in righteous
horror at people who broke or were even rumored to have broken the
Seventh Commandment. He did not take this talk seriously. Already he had
broken it secretly many times. Other young men did. Yet again, he was a
little sick of the women of the streets and the bagnio. There were
too many coarse, evil features in connection with such contacts. For
a little while, the false tinsel-glitter of the house of ill repute
appealed to him, for there was a certain force to its luxury--rich, as
a rule, with red-plush furniture, showy red hangings, some coarse but
showily-framed pictures, and, above all, the strong-bodied or sensuously
lymphatic women who dwelt there, to (as his mother phrased it) prey on
men. The strength of their bodies, the lust of their souls, the fact
that they could, with a show of affection or good-nature, receive man
after man, astonished and later disgusted him. After all, they were not
smart. There was no vivacity of thought there. All that they could do,
in the main, he fancied, was this one thing. He pictured to himself the
dreariness of the mornings after, the stale dregs of things when only
sleep and thought of gain could aid in the least; and more than once,
even at his age, he shook his head. He wanted contact which was more
intimate, subtle, individual, personal.

So came Lillian Semple, who was nothing more to him than the shadow of
an ideal. Yet she cleared up certain of his ideas in regard to women.
She was not physically as vigorous or brutal as those other women
whom he had encountered in the lupanars, thus far--raw, unashamed
contraveners of accepted theories and notions--and for that very
reason he liked her. And his thoughts continued to dwell on her,
notwithstanding the hectic days which now passed like flashes of light
in his new business venture. For this stock exchange world in which
he now found himself, primitive as it would seem to-day, was most
fascinating to Cowperwood. The room that he went to in Third Street, at
Dock, where the brokers or their agents and clerks gathered one hundred
and fifty strong, was nothing to speak of artistically--a square
chamber sixty by sixty, reaching from the second floor to the roof of a
four-story building; but it was striking to him. The windows were high
and narrow; a large-faced clock faced the west entrance of the
room where you came in from the stairs; a collection of telegraph
instruments, with their accompanying desks and chairs, occupied the
northeast corner. On the floor, in the early days of the exchange, were
rows of chairs where the brokers sat while various lots of stocks were
offered to them. Later in the history of the exchange the chairs were
removed and at different points posts or floor-signs indicating where
certain stocks were traded in were introduced. Around these the men who
were interested gathered to do their trading. From a hall on the third
floor a door gave entrance to a visitor's gallery, small and poorly
furnished; and on the west wall a large blackboard carried current
quotations in stocks as telegraphed from New York and Boston. A
wicket-like fence in the center of the room surrounded the desk and
chair of the official recorder; and a very small gallery opening from
the third floor on the west gave place for the secretary of the board,
when he had any special announcement to make. There was a room off the
southwest corner, where reports and annual compendiums of chairs were
removed and at different signs indicating where certain stocks of
various kinds were kept and were available for the use of members.

Young Cowperwood would not have been admitted at all, as either a broker
or broker's agent or assistant, except that Tighe, feeling that he
needed him and believing that he would be very useful, bought him a seat
on 'change--charging the two thousand dollars it cost as a debt and then
ostensibly taking him into partnership. It was against the rules of the
exchange to sham a partnership in this way in order to put a man on the
floor, but brokers did it. These men who were known to be minor partners
and floor assistants were derisively called "eighth chasers" and
"two-dollar brokers," because they were always seeking small orders and
were willing to buy or sell for anybody on their commission, accounting,
of course, to their firms for their work. Cowperwood, regardless of his
intrinsic merits, was originally counted one of their number, and he was
put under the direction of Mr. Arthur Rivers, the regular floor man of
Tighe & Company.

Rivers was an exceedingly forceful man of thirty-five, well-dressed,
well-formed, with a hard, smooth, evenly chiseled face, which was
ornamented by a short, black mustache and fine, black, clearly penciled
eyebrows. His hair came to an odd point at the middle of his forehead,
where he divided it, and his chin was faintly and attractively cleft. He
had a soft voice, a quiet, conservative manner, and both in and out of
this brokerage and trading world was controlled by good form. Cowperwood
wondered at first why Rivers should work for Tighe--he appeared almost
as able--but afterward learned that he was in the company. Tighe was the
organizer and general hand-shaker, Rivers the floor and outside man.

It was useless, as Frank soon found, to try to figure out exactly why
stocks rose and fell. Some general reasons there were, of course, as he
was told by Tighe, but they could not always be depended on.

"Sure, anything can make or break a market"--Tighe explained in his
delicate brogue--"from the failure of a bank to the rumor that your
second cousin's grandmother has a cold. It's a most unusual world,
Cowperwood. No man can explain it. I've seen breaks in stocks that you
could never explain at all--no one could. It wouldn't be possible to
find out why they broke. I've seen rises the same way. My God, the
rumors of the stock exchange! They beat the devil. If they're going down
in ordinary times some one is unloading, or they're rigging the market.
If they're going up--God knows times must be good or somebody must
be buying--that's sure. Beyond that--well, ask Rivers to show you the
ropes. Don't you ever lose for me, though. That's the cardinal sin in
this office." He grinned maliciously, even if kindly, at that.

Cowperwood understood--none better. This subtle world appealed to him.
It answered to his temperament.

There were rumors, rumors, rumors--of great railway and street-car
undertakings, land developments, government revision of the tariff, war
between France and Turkey, famine in Russia or Ireland, and so on. The
first Atlantic cable had not been laid as yet, and news of any kind from
abroad was slow and meager. Still there were great financial figures in
the held, men who, like Cyrus Field, or William H. Vanderbilt, or F. X.
Drexel, were doing marvelous things, and their activities and the rumors
concerning them counted for much.

Frank soon picked up all of the technicalities of the situation. A
"bull," he learned, was one who bought in anticipation of a higher price
to come; and if he was "loaded up" with a "line" of stocks he was said
to be "long." He sold to "realize" his profit, or if his margins were
exhausted he was "wiped out." A "bear" was one who sold stocks which
most frequently he did not have, in anticipation of a lower price, at
which he could buy and satisfy his previous sales. He was "short" when
he had sold what he did not own, and he "covered" when he bought to
satisfy his sales and to realize his profits or to protect himself
against further loss in case prices advanced instead of declining. He
was in a "corner" when he found that he could not buy in order to make
good the stock he had borrowed for delivery and the return of which
had been demanded. He was then obliged to settle practically at a price
fixed by those to whom he and other "shorts" had sold.

He smiled at first at the air of great secrecy and wisdom on the part
of the younger men. They were so heartily and foolishly suspicious. The
older men, as a rule, were inscrutable. They pretended indifference,
uncertainty. They were like certain fish after a certain kind of bait,
however. Snap! and the opportunity was gone. Somebody else had picked up
what you wanted. All had their little note-books. All had their peculiar
squint of eye or position or motion which meant "Done! I take you!"
Sometimes they seemed scarcely to confirm their sales or purchases--they
knew each other so well--but they did. If the market was for any reason
active, the brokers and their agents were apt to be more numerous than
if it were dull and the trading indifferent. A gong sounded the call to
trading at ten o'clock, and if there was a noticeable rise or decline in
a stock or a group of stocks, you were apt to witness quite a spirited
scene. Fifty to a hundred men would shout, gesticulate, shove here and
there in an apparently aimless manner; endeavoring to take advantage of
the stock offered or called for.

"Five-eighths for five hundred P. and W.," some one would call--Rivers
or Cowperwood, or any other broker.

"Five hundred at three-fourths," would come the reply from some one
else, who either had an order to sell the stock at that price or who
was willing to sell it short, hoping to pick up enough of the stock at
a lower figure later to fill his order and make a little something
besides. If the supply of stock at that figure was large Rivers would
probably continue to bid five-eighths. If, on the other hand, he noticed
an increasing demand, he would probably pay three-fourths for it. If
the professional traders believed Rivers had a large buying order, they
would probably try to buy the stock before he could at three-fourths,
believing they could sell it out to him at a slightly higher price. The
professional traders were, of course, keen students of psychology; and
their success depended on their ability to guess whether or not a broker
representing a big manipulator, like Tighe, had an order large enough
to affect the market sufficiently to give them an opportunity to "get
in and out," as they termed it, at a profit before he had completed the
execution of his order. They were like hawks watching for an opportunity
to snatch their prey from under the very claws of their opponents.

Four, five, ten, fifteen, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, and sometimes
the whole company would attempt to take advantage of the given rise of
a given stock by either selling or offering to buy, in which case the
activity and the noise would become deafening. Given groups might
be trading in different things; but the large majority of them would
abandon what they were doing in order to take advantage of a speciality.
The eagerness of certain young brokers or clerks to discover all that
was going on, and to take advantage of any given rise or fall, made
for quick physical action, darting to and fro, the excited elevation of
explanatory fingers. Distorted faces were shoved over shoulders or
under arms. The most ridiculous grimaces were purposely or unconsciously
indulged in. At times there were situations in which some individual was
fairly smothered with arms, faces, shoulders, crowded toward him when
he manifested any intention of either buying or selling at a
profitable rate. At first it seemed quite a wonderful thing to young
Cowperwood--the very physical face of it--for he liked human presence
and activity; but a little later the sense of the thing as a picture or
a dramatic situation, of which he was a part faded, and he came down to
a clearer sense of the intricacies of the problem before him. Buying
and selling stocks, as he soon learned, was an art, a subtlety, almost a
psychic emotion. Suspicion, intuition, feeling--these were the things to
be "long" on.

Yet in time he also asked himself, who was it who made the real
money--the stock-brokers? Not at all. Some of them were making money,
but they were, as he quickly saw, like a lot of gulls or stormy petrels,
hanging on the lee of the wind, hungry and anxious to snap up any
unwary fish. Back of them were other men, men with shrewd ideas, subtle
resources. Men of immense means whose enterprise and holdings these
stocks represented, the men who schemed out and built the railroads,
opened the mines, organized trading enterprises, and built up immense
manufactories. They might use brokers or other agents to buy and sell on
'change; but this buying and selling must be, and always was, incidental
to the actual fact--the mine, the railroad, the wheat crop, the flour
mill, and so on. Anything less than straight-out sales to realize
quickly on assets, or buying to hold as an investment, was gambling
pure and simple, and these men were gamblers. He was nothing more than
a gambler's agent. It was not troubling him any just at this moment, but
it was not at all a mystery now, what he was. As in the case of Waterman
& Company, he sized up these men shrewdly, judging some to be weak, some
foolish, some clever, some slow, but in the main all small-minded or
deficient because they were agents, tools, or gamblers. A man, a real
man, must never be an agent, a tool, or a gambler--acting for himself
or for others--he must employ such. A real man--a financier--was never a
tool. He used tools. He created. He led.

Clearly, very clearly, at nineteen, twenty, and twenty-one years of age,
he saw all this, but he was not quite ready yet to do anything about it.
He was certain, however, that his day would come.





Chapter VII


In the meantime, his interest in Mrs. Semple had been secretly and
strangely growing. When he received an invitation to call at the Semple
home, he accepted with a great deal of pleasure. Their house was located
not so very far from his own, on North Front Street, in the neighborhood
of what is now known as No. 956. It had, in summer, quite a wealth of
green leaves and vines. The little side porch which ornamented its south
wall commanded a charming view of the river, and all the windows and
doors were topped with lunettes of small-paned glass. The interior
of the house was not as pleasing as he would have had it. Artistic
impressiveness, as to the furniture at least, was wanting, although it
was new and good. The pictures were--well, simply pictures. There were
no books to speak of--the Bible, a few current novels, some of the more
significant histories, and a collection of antiquated odds and ends in
the shape of books inherited from relatives. The china was good--of a
delicate pattern. The carpets and wall-paper were too high in key. So it
went. Still, the personality of Lillian Semple was worth something,
for she was really pleasing to look upon, making a picture wherever she
stood or sat.

There were no children--a dispensation of sex conditions which had
nothing to do with her, for she longed to have them. She was without any
notable experience in social life, except such as had come to the Wiggin
family, of which she was a member--relatives and a few neighborhood
friends visiting. Lillian Wiggin, that was her maiden name--had two
brothers and one sister, all living in Philadelphia and all married at
this time. They thought she had done very well in her marriage.

It could not be said that she had wildly loved Mr. Semple at any time.
Although she had cheerfully married him, he was not the kind of man who
could arouse a notable passion in any woman. He was practical, methodic,
orderly. His shoe store was a good one--well-stocked with styles
reflecting the current tastes and a model of cleanliness and what one
might term pleasing brightness. He loved to talk, when he talked at
all, of shoe manufacturing, the development of lasts and styles. The
ready-made shoe--machine-made to a certain extent--was just coming into
its own slowly, and outside of these, supplies of which he kept, he
employed bench-making shoemakers, satisfying his customers with personal
measurements and making the shoes to order.

Mrs. Semple read a little--not much. She had a habit of sitting and
apparently brooding reflectively at times, but it was not based on any
deep thought. She had that curious beauty of body, though, that made her
somewhat like a figure on an antique vase, or out of a Greek chorus. It
was in this light, unquestionably, that Cowperwood saw her, for from the
beginning he could not keep his eyes off her. In a way, she was aware
of this but she did not attach any significance to it. Thoroughly
conventional, satisfied now that her life was bound permanently
with that of her husband, she had settled down to a staid and quiet
existence.

At first, when Frank called, she did not have much to say. She was
gracious, but the burden of conversation fell on her husband. Cowperwood
watched the varying expression of her face from time to time, and if she
had been at all psychic she must have felt something. Fortunately she
was not. Semple talked to him pleasantly, because in the first place
Frank was becoming financially significant, was suave and ingratiating,
and in the next place he was anxious to get richer and somehow Frank
represented progress to him in that line. One spring evening they sat on
the porch and talked--nothing very important--slavery, street-cars, the
panic--it was on then, that of 1857--the development of the West. Mr.
Semple wanted to know all about the stock exchange. In return Frank
asked about the shoe business, though he really did not care. All the
while, inoffensively, he watched Mrs. Semple. Her manner, he thought,
was soothing, attractive, delightful. She served tea and cake for them.
They went inside after a time to avoid the mosquitoes. She played the
piano. At ten o'clock he left.

Thereafter, for a year or so, Cowperwood bought his shoes of Mr. Semple.
Occasionally also he stopped in the Chestnut Street store to exchange
the time of the day. Semple asked his opinion as to the advisability
of buying some shares in the Fifth and Sixth Street line, which, having
secured a franchise, was creating great excitement. Cowperwood gave
him his best judgment. It was sure to be profitable. He himself had
purchased one hundred shares at five dollars a share, and urged Semple
to do so. But he was not interested in him personally. He liked Mrs.
Semple, though he did not see her very often.

About a year later, Mr. Semple died. It was an untimely death, one
of those fortuitous and in a way insignificant episodes which are,
nevertheless, dramatic in a dull way to those most concerned. He was
seized with a cold in the chest late in the fall--one of those seizures
ordinarily attributed to wet feet or to going out on a damp day without
an overcoat--and had insisted on going to business when Mrs. Semple
urged him to stay at home and recuperate. He was in his way a very
determined person, not obstreperously so, but quietly and under the
surface. Business was a great urge. He saw himself soon to be worth
about fifty thousand dollars. Then this cold--nine more days of
pneumonia--and he was dead. The shoe store was closed for a few days;
the house was full of sympathetic friends and church people. There was
a funeral, with burial service in the Callowhill Presbyterian Church, to
which they belonged, and then he was buried. Mrs. Semple cried bitterly.
The shock of death affected her greatly and left her for a time in a
depressed state. A brother of hers, David Wiggin, undertook for the time
being to run the shoe business for her. There was no will, but in the
final adjustment, which included the sale of the shoe business, there
being no desire on anybody's part to contest her right to all the
property, she received over eighteen thousand dollars. She continued
to reside in the Front Street house, and was considered a charming and
interesting widow.

Throughout this procedure young Cowperwood, only twenty years of age,
was quietly manifest. He called during the illness. He attended the
funeral. He helped her brother, David Wiggin, dispose of the shoe
business. He called once or twice after the funeral, then stayed away
for a considerable time. In five months he reappeared, and thereafter he
was a caller at stated intervals--periods of a week or ten days.

Again, it would be hard to say what he saw in Semple. Her prettiness,
wax-like in its quality, fascinated him; her indifference aroused
perhaps his combative soul. He could not have explained why, but he
wanted her in an urgent, passionate way. He could not think of her
reasonably, and he did not talk of her much to any one. His family knew
that he went to see her, but there had grown up in the Cowperwood family
a deep respect for the mental force of Frank. He was genial, cheerful,
gay at most times, without being talkative, and he was decidedly
successful. Everybody knew he was making money now. His salary was fifty
dollars a week, and he was certain soon to get more. Some lots of his in
West Philadelphia, bought three years before, had increased notably in
value. His street-car holdings, augmented by still additional lots of
fifty and one hundred and one hundred and fifty shares in new lines
incorporated, were slowly rising, in spite of hard times, from the
initiative five dollars in each case to ten, fifteen, and twenty-five
dollars a share--all destined to go to par. He was liked in the
financial district and he was sure that he had a successful future.
Because of his analysis of the brokerage situation he had come to the
conclusion that he did not want to be a stock gambler. Instead, he was
considering the matter of engaging in bill-brokering, a business which
he had observed to be very profitable and which involved no risk as long
as one had capital. Through his work and his father's connections he
had met many people--merchants, bankers, traders. He could get their
business, or a part of it, he knew. People in Drexel & Co. and Clark &
Co. were friendly to him. Jay Cooke, a rising banking personality, was a
personal friend of his.

Meanwhile he called on Mrs. Semple, and the more he called the better he
liked her. There was no exchange of brilliant ideas between them; but he
had a way of being comforting and social when he wished. He advised
her about her business affairs in so intelligent a way that even her
relatives approved of it. She came to like him, because he was so
considerate, quiet, reassuring, and so ready to explain over and over
until everything was quite plain to her. She could see that he was
looking on her affairs quite as if they were his own, trying to make
them safe and secure.

"You're so very kind, Frank," she said to him, one night. "I'm awfully
grateful. I don't know what I would have done if it hadn't been for
you."

She looked at his handsome face, which was turned to hers, with
child-like simplicity.

"Not at all. Not at all. I want to do it. I wouldn't have been happy if
I couldn't."

His eyes had a peculiar, subtle ray in them--not a gleam. She felt warm
toward him, sympathetic, quite satisfied that she could lean on him.

"Well, I am very grateful just the same. You've been so good. Come out
Sunday again, if you want to, or any evening. I'll be home."

It was while he was calling on her in this way that his Uncle Seneca
died in Cuba and left him fifteen thousand dollars. This money made him
worth nearly twenty-five thousand dollars in his own right, and he knew
exactly what to do with it. A panic had come since Mr. Semple had died,
which had illustrated to him very clearly what an uncertain thing the
brokerage business was. There was really a severe business depression.
Money was so scarce that it could fairly be said not to exist at all.
Capital, frightened by uncertain trade and money conditions, everywhere,
retired to its hiding-places in banks, vaults, tea-kettles, and
stockings. The country seemed to be going to the dogs. War with the
South or secession was vaguely looming up in the distance. The temper of
the whole nation was nervous. People dumped their holdings on the market
in order to get money. Tighe discharged three of his clerks. He cut down
his expenses in every possible way, and used up all his private savings
to protect his private holdings. He mortgaged his house, his land
holdings--everything; and in many instances young Cowperwood was his
intermediary, carrying blocks of shares to different banks to get what
he could on them.

"See if your father's bank won't loan me fifteen thousand on these," he
said to Frank, one day, producing a bundle of Philadelphia & Wilmington
shares. Frank had heard his father speak of them in times past as
excellent.

"They ought to be good," the elder Cowperwood said, dubiously, when
shown the package of securities. "At any other time they would be. But
money is so tight. We find it awfully hard these days to meet our own
obligations. I'll talk to Mr. Kugel." Mr. Kugel was the president.

There was a long conversation--a long wait. His father came back to say
it was doubtful whether they could make the loan. Eight per cent., then
being secured for money, was a small rate of interest, considering its
need. For ten per cent. Mr. Kugel might make a call-loan. Frank went
back to his employer, whose commercial choler rose at the report.

"For Heaven's sake, is there no money at all in the town?" he demanded,
contentiously. "Why, the interest they want is ruinous! I can't stand
that. Well, take 'em back and bring me the money. Good God, this'll
never do at all, at all!"

Frank went back. "He'll pay ten per cent.," he said, quietly.

Tighe was credited with a deposit of fifteen thousand dollars, with
privilege to draw against it at once. He made out a check for the
total fifteen thousand at once to the Girard National Bank to cover a
shrinkage there. So it went.

During all these days young Cowperwood was following these financial
complications with interest. He was not disturbed by the cause of
slavery, or the talk of secession, or the general progress or decline of
the country, except in so far as it affected his immediate interests. He
longed to become a stable financier; but, now that he saw the inside of
the brokerage business, he was not so sure that he wanted to stay in
it. Gambling in stocks, according to conditions produced by this panic,
seemed very hazardous. A number of brokers failed. He saw them rush in
to Tighe with anguished faces and ask that certain trades be canceled.
Their very homes were in danger, they said. They would be wiped out,
their wives and children put out on the street.

This panic, incidentally, only made Frank more certain as to what he
really wanted to do--now that he had this free money, he would go into
business for himself. Even Tighe's offer of a minor partnership failed
to tempt him.

"I think you have a nice business," he explained, in refusing, "but I
want to get in the note-brokerage business for myself. I don't trust
this stock game. I'd rather have a little business of my own than all
the floor work in this world."

"But you're pretty young, Frank," argued his employer. "You have lots of
time to work for yourself." In the end he parted friends with both Tighe
and Rivers. "That's a smart young fellow," observed Tighe, ruefully.

"He'll make his mark," rejoined Rivers. "He's the shrewdest boy of his
age I ever saw."





Chapter VIII


Cowperwood's world at this time was of roseate hue. He was in love and
had money of his own to start his new business venture. He could take
his street-car stocks, which were steadily increasing in value, and
raise seventy per cent. of their market value. He could put a mortgage
on his lots and get money there, if necessary. He had established
financial relations with the Girard National Bank--President Davison
there having taken a fancy to him--and he proposed to borrow from that
institution some day. All he wanted was suitable investments--things in
which he could realize surely, quickly. He saw fine prospective profits
in the street-car lines, which were rapidly developing into local
ramifications.

He purchased a horse and buggy about this time--the most
attractive-looking animal and vehicle he could find--the combination
cost him five hundred dollars--and invited Mrs. Semple to drive with
him. She refused at first, but later consented. He had told her of his
success, his prospects, his windfall of fifteen thousand dollars, his
intention of going into the note-brokerage business. She knew his father
was likely to succeed to the position of vice-president in the Third
National Bank, and she liked the Cowperwoods. Now she began to realize
that there was something more than mere friendship here. This erstwhile
boy was a man, and he was calling on her. It was almost ridiculous in
the face of things--her seniority, her widowhood, her placid, retiring
disposition--but the sheer, quiet, determined force of this young man
made it plain that he was not to be balked by her sense of convention.

Cowperwood did not delude himself with any noble theories of conduct in
regard to her. She was beautiful, with a mental and physical lure for
him that was irresistible, and that was all he desired to know. No other
woman was holding him like that. It never occurred to him that he could
not or should not like other women at the same time. There was a great
deal of palaver about the sanctity of the home. It rolled off his mental
sphere like water off the feathers of a duck. He was not eager for her
money, though he was well aware of it. He felt that he could use it
to her advantage. He wanted her physically. He felt a keen, primitive
interest in the children they would have. He wanted to find out if he
could make her love him vigorously and could rout out the memory of her
former life. Strange ambition. Strange perversion, one might almost say.

In spite of her fears and her uncertainty, Lillian Semple accepted his
attentions and interest because, equally in spite of herself, she was
drawn to him. One night, when she was going to bed, she stopped in front
of her dressing table and looked at her face and her bare neck and arms.
They were very pretty. A subtle something came over her as she surveyed
her long, peculiarly shaded hair. She thought of young Cowperwood, and
then was chilled and shamed by the vision of the late Mr. Semple and the
force and quality of public opinion.

"Why do you come to see me so often?" she asked him when he called the
following evening.

"Oh, don't you know?" he replied, looking at her in an interpretive way.

"No."

"Sure you don't?"

"Well, I know you liked Mr. Semple, and I always thought you liked me as
his wife. He's gone, though, now."

"And you're here," he replied.

"And I'm here?"

"Yes. I like you. I like to be with you. Don't you like me that way?"

"Why, I've never thought of it. You're so much younger. I'm five years
older than you are."

"In years," he said, "certainly. That's nothing. I'm fifteen years older
than you are in other ways. I know more about life in some ways than
you can ever hope to learn--don't you think so?" he added, softly,
persuasively.

"Well, that's true. But I know a lot of things you don't know." She
laughed softly, showing her pretty teeth.

It was evening. They were on the side porch. The river was before them.

"Yes, but that's only because you're a woman. A man can't hope to get a
woman's point of view exactly. But I'm talking about practical affairs
of this world. You're not as old that way as I am."

"Well, what of it?"

"Nothing. You asked why I came to see you. That's why. Partly."

He relapsed into silence and stared at the water.

She looked at him. His handsome body, slowly broadening, was nearly full
grown. His face, because of its full, clear, big, inscrutable eyes, had
an expression which was almost babyish. She could not have guessed the
depths it veiled. His cheeks were pink, his hands not large, but sinewy
and strong. Her pale, uncertain, lymphatic body extracted a form of
dynamic energy from him even at this range.

"I don't think you ought to come to see me so often. People won't think
well of it." She ventured to take a distant, matronly air--the air she
had originally held toward him.

"People," he said, "don't worry about people. People think what you want
them to think. I wish you wouldn't take that distant air toward me."

"Why?"

"Because I like you."

"But you mustn't like me. It's wrong. I can't ever marry you. You're too
young. I'm too old."

"Don't say that!" he said, imperiously. "There's nothing to it. I want
you to marry me. You know I do. Now, when will it be?"

"Why, how silly! I never heard of such a thing!" she exclaimed. "It will
never be, Frank. It can't be!"

"Why can't it?" he asked.

"Because--well, because I'm older. People would think it strange. I'm
not long enough free."

"Oh, long enough nothing!" he exclaimed, irritably. "That's the one
thing I have against you--you are so worried about what people think.
They don't make your life. They certainly don't make mine. Think of
yourself first. You have your own life to make. Are you going to let
what other people think stand in the way of what you want to do?"

"But I don't want to," she smiled.

He arose and came over to her, looking into her eyes.

"Well?" she asked, nervously, quizzically.

He merely looked at her.

"Well?" she queried, more flustered.

He stooped down to take her arms, but she got up.

"Now you must not come near me," she pleaded, determinedly. "I'll go
in the house, and I'll not let you come any more. It's terrible! You're
silly! You mustn't interest yourself in me."

She did show a good deal of determination, and he desisted. But for the
time being only. He called again and again. Then one night, when they
had gone inside because of the mosquitoes, and when she had insisted
that he must stop coming to see her, that his attentions were noticeable
to others, and that she would be disgraced, he caught her, under
desperate protest, in his arms.

"Now, see here!" she exclaimed. "I told you! It's silly! You mustn't
kiss me! How dare you! Oh! oh! oh!--"

She broke away and ran up the near-by stairway to her room. Cowperwood
followed her swiftly. As she pushed the door to he forced it open
and recaptured her. He lifted her bodily from her feet and held her
crosswise, lying in his arms.

"Oh, how could you!" she exclaimed. "I will never speak to you any more.
I will never let you come here any more if you don't put me down this
minute. Put me down!"

"I'll put you down, sweet," he said. "I'll take you down," at the same
time pulling her face to him and kissing her. He was very much aroused,
excited.

While she was twisting and protesting, he carried her down the stairs
again into the living-room, and seated himself in the great armchair,
still holding her tight in his arms.

"Oh!" she sighed, falling limp on his shoulder when he refused to let
her go. Then, because of the set determination of his face, some intense
pull in him, she smiled. "How would I ever explain if I did marry you?"
she asked, weakly. "Your father! Your mother!"

"You don't need to explain. I'll do that. And you needn't worry about my
family. They won't care."

"But mine," she recoiled.

"Don't worry about yours. I'm not marrying your family. I'm marrying
you. We have independent means."

She relapsed into additional protests; but he kissed her the more. There
was a deadly persuasion to his caresses. Mr. Semple had never displayed
any such fire. He aroused a force of feeling in her which had not
previously been there. She was afraid of it and ashamed.

"Will you marry me in a month?" he asked, cheerfully, when she paused.

"You know I won't!" she exclaimed, nervously. "The idea! Why do you
ask?"

"What difference does it make? We're going to get married eventually."
He was thinking how attractive he could make her look in other
surroundings. Neither she nor his family knew how to live.

"Well, not in a month. Wait a little while. I will marry you after a
while--after you see whether you want me."

He caught her tight. "I'll show you," he said.

"Please stop. You hurt me."

"How about it? Two months?"

"Certainly not."

"Three?"

"Well, maybe."

"No maybe in that case. We marry."

"But you're only a boy."

"Don't worry about me. You'll find out how much of a boy I am."

He seemed of a sudden to open up a new world to her, and she realized
that she had never really lived before. This man represented something
bigger and stronger than ever her husband had dreamed of. In his young
way he was terrible, irresistible.

"Well, in three months then," she whispered, while he rocked her cozily
in his arms.





Chapter IX


Cowperwood started in the note brokerage business with a small office
at No. 64 South Third Street, where he very soon had the pleasure of
discovering that his former excellent business connections remembered
him. He would go to one house, where he suspected ready money might be
desirable, and offer to negotiate their notes or any paper they might
issue bearing six per cent. interest for a commission and then he would
sell the paper for a small commission to some one who would welcome a
secure investment. Sometimes his father, sometimes other people, helped
him with suggestions as to when and how. Between the two ends he might
make four and five per cent. on the total transaction. In the first year
he cleared six thousand dollars over and above all expenses. That wasn't
much, but he was augmenting it in another way which he believed would
bring great profit in the future.

Before the first street-car line, which was a shambling affair, had been
laid on Front Street, the streets of Philadelphia had been crowded
with hundreds of springless omnibuses rattling over rough, hard,
cobblestones. Now, thanks to the idea of John Stephenson, in New York,
the double rail track idea had come, and besides the line on Fifth and
Sixth Streets (the cars running out one street and back on another)
which had paid splendidly from the start, there were many other lines
proposed or under way. The city was as eager to see street-cars
replace omnibuses as it was to see railroads replace canals. There
was opposition, of course. There always is in such cases. The cry of
probable monopoly was raised. Disgruntled and defeated omnibus owners
and drivers groaned aloud.

Cowperwood had implicit faith in the future of the street railway. In
support of this belief he risked all he could spare on new issues of
stock shares in new companies. He wanted to be on the inside wherever
possible, always, though this was a little difficult in the matter of
the street-railways, he having been so young when they started and not
having yet arranged his financial connections to make them count for
much. The Fifth and Sixth Street line, which had been but recently
started, was paying six hundred dollars a day. A project for a West
Philadelphia line (Walnut and Chestnut) was on foot, as were lines to
occupy Second and Third Streets, Race and Vine, Spruce and Pine, Green
and Coates, Tenth and Eleventh, and so forth. They were engineered and
backed by some powerful capitalists who had influence with the State
legislature and could, in spite of great public protest, obtain
franchises. Charges of corruption were in the air. It was argued that
the streets were valuable, and that the companies should pay a road tax
of a thousand dollars a mile. Somehow, however, these splendid grants
were gotten through, and the public, hearing of the Fifth and Sixth
Street line profits, was eager to invest. Cowperwood was one of these,
and when the Second and Third Street line was engineered, he invested in
that and in the Walnut and Chestnut Street line also. He began to have
vague dreams of controlling a line himself some day, but as yet he did
not see exactly how it was to be done, since his business was far from
being a bonanza.

In the midst of this early work he married Mrs. Semple. There was no
vast to-do about it, as he did not want any and his bride-to-be was
nervous, fearsome of public opinion. His family did not entirely
approve. She was too old, his mother and father thought, and then Frank,
with his prospects, could have done much better. His sister Anna fancied
that Mrs. Semple was designing, which was, of course, not true. His
brothers, Joseph and Edward, were interested, but not certain as to what
they actually thought, since Mrs. Semple was good-looking and had some
money.

It was a warm October day when he and Lillian went to the altar, in the
First Presbyterian Church of Callowhill Street. His bride, Frank was
satisfied, looked exquisite in a trailing gown of cream lace--a creation
that had cost months of labor. His parents, Mrs. Seneca Davis, the
Wiggin family, brothers and sisters, and some friends were present. He
was a little opposed to this idea, but Lillian wanted it. He stood
up straight and correct in black broadcloth for the wedding
ceremony--because she wished it, but later changed to a smart business
suit for traveling. He had arranged his affairs for a two weeks' trip
to New York and Boston. They took an afternoon train for New York, which
required five hours to reach. When they were finally alone in the Astor
House, New York, after hours of make-believe and public pretense of
indifference, he gathered her in his arms.

"Oh, it's delicious," he exclaimed, "to have you all to myself."

She met his eagerness with that smiling, tantalizing passivity which
he had so much admired but which this time was tinged strongly with a
communicated desire. He thought he should never have enough of her, her
beautiful face, her lovely arms, her smooth, lymphatic body. They were
like two children, billing and cooing, driving, dining, seeing the
sights. He was curious to visit the financial sections of both cities.
New York and Boston appealed to him as commercially solid. He wondered,
as he observed the former, whether he should ever leave Philadelphia.
He was going to be very happy there now, he thought, with Lillian and
possibly a brood of young Cowperwoods. He was going to work hard and
make money. With his means and hers now at his command, he might become,
very readily, notably wealthy.





Chapter X


The home atmosphere which they established when they returned from
their honeymoon was a great improvement in taste over that which had
characterized the earlier life of Mrs. Cowperwood as Mrs. Semple. They
had decided to occupy her house, on North Front Street, for a while at
least. Cowperwood, aggressive in his current artistic mood, had objected
at once after they were engaged to the spirit of the furniture and
decorations, or lack of them, and had suggested that he be allowed to
have it brought more in keeping with his idea of what was appropriate.
During the years in which he had been growing into manhood he had come
instinctively into sound notions of what was artistic and refined. He
had seen so many homes that were more distinguished and harmonious than
his own. One could not walk or drive about Philadelphia without seeing
and being impressed with the general tendency toward a more cultivated
and selective social life. Many excellent and expensive houses were
being erected. The front lawn, with some attempt at floral gardening,
was achieving local popularity. In the homes of the Tighes, the
Leighs, Arthur Rivers, and others, he had noticed art objects of some
distinction--bronzes, marbles, hangings, pictures, clocks, rugs.

It seemed to him now that his comparatively commonplace house could be
made into something charming and for comparatively little money. The
dining-room for instance which, through two plain windows set in a hat
side wall back of the veranda, looked south over a stretch of grass and
several trees and bushes to a dividing fence where the Semple property
ended and a neighbor's began, could be made so much more attractive.
That fence--sharp-pointed, gray palings--could be torn away and a hedge
put in its place. The wall which divided the dining-room from the parlor
could be knocked through and a hanging of some pleasing character put in
its place. A bay-window could be built to replace the two present oblong
windows--a bay which would come down to the floor and open out on the
lawn via swiveled, diamond-shaped, lead-paned frames. All this shabby,
nondescript furniture, collected from heaven knows where--partly
inherited from the Semples and the Wiggins and partly bought--could be
thrown out or sold and something better and more harmonious introduced.
He knew a young man by the name of Ellsworth, an architect newly
graduated from a local school, with whom he had struck up an interesting
friendship--one of those inexplicable inclinations of temperament.
Wilton Ellsworth was an artist in spirit, quiet, meditative, refined.
From discussing the quality of a certain building on Chestnut Street
which was then being erected, and which Ellsworth pronounced atrocious,
they had fallen to discussing art in general, or the lack of it, in
America. And it occurred to him that Ellsworth was the man to carry out
his decorative views to a nicety. When he suggested the young man to
Lillian, she placidly agreed with him and also with his own ideas of how
the house could be revised.

So while they were gone on their honeymoon Ellsworth began the revision
on an estimated cost of three thousand dollars, including the furniture.
It was not completed for nearly three weeks after their return; but when
finished made a comparatively new house. The dining-room bay hung low
over the grass, as Frank wished, and the windows were diamond-paned
and leaded, swiveled on brass rods. The parlor and dining-room were
separated by sliding doors; but the intention was to hang in this
opening a silk hanging depicting a wedding scene in Normandy. Old
English oak was used in the dining-room, an American imitation of
Chippendale and Sheraton for the sitting-room and the bedrooms. There
were a few simple water-colors hung here and there, some bronzes of
Hosmer and Powers, a marble venus by Potter, a now forgotten sculptor,
and other objects of art--nothing of any distinction. Pleasing,
appropriately colored rugs covered the floor. Mrs. Cowperwood was
shocked by the nudity of the Venus which conveyed an atmosphere of
European freedom not common to America; but she said nothing. It was all
harmonious and soothing, and she did not feel herself capable to judge.
Frank knew about these things so much better than she did. Then with
a maid and a man of all work installed, a program of entertaining was
begun on a small scale.

Those who recall the early years of their married life can best realize
the subtle changes which this new condition brought to Frank, for, like
all who accept the hymeneal yoke, he was influenced to a certain extent
by the things with which he surrounded himself. Primarily, from certain
traits of his character, one would have imagined him called to be a
citizen of eminent respectability and worth. He appeared to be an ideal
home man. He delighted to return to his wife in the evenings, leaving
the crowded downtown section where traffic clamored and men hurried.
Here he could feel that he was well-stationed and physically happy in
life. The thought of the dinner-table with candles upon it (his idea);
the thought of Lillian in a trailing gown of pale-blue or green silk--he
liked her in those colors; the thought of a large fireplace flaming with
solid lengths of cord-wood, and Lillian snuggling in his arms, gripped
his immature imagination. As has been said before, he cared nothing for
books, but life, pictures, trees, physical contact--these, in spite of
his shrewd and already gripping financial calculations, held him. To
live richly, joyously, fully--his whole nature craved that.

And Mrs. Cowperwood, in spite of the difference in their years, appeared
to be a fit mate for him at this time. She was once awakened, and for
the time being, clinging, responsive, dreamy. His mood and hers was for
a baby, and in a little while that happy expectation was whispered to
him by her. She had half fancied that her previous barrenness was due to
herself, and was rather surprised and delighted at the proof that it
was not so. It opened new possibilities--a seemingly glorious future of
which she was not afraid. He liked it, the idea of self-duplication. It
was almost acquisitive, this thought. For days and weeks and months and
years, at least the first four or five, he took a keen satisfaction in
coming home evenings, strolling about the yard, driving with his wife,
having friends in to dinner, talking over with her in an explanatory
way the things he intended to do. She did not understand his financial
abstrusities, and he did not trouble to make them clear.

But love, her pretty body, her lips, her quiet manner--the lure of
all these combined, and his two children, when they came--two in four
years--held him. He would dandle Frank, Jr., who was the first to
arrive, on his knee, looking at his chubby feet, his kindling eyes, his
almost formless yet bud-like mouth, and wonder at the process by which
children came into the world. There was so much to think of in this
connection--the spermatozoic beginning, the strange period of gestation
in women, the danger of disease and delivery. He had gone through a
real period of strain when Frank, Jr., was born, for Mrs. Cowperwood
was frightened. He feared for the beauty of her body--troubled over the
danger of losing her; and he actually endured his first worry when he
stood outside the door the day the child came. Not much--he was too
self-sufficient, too resourceful; and yet he worried, conjuring up
thoughts of death and the end of their present state. Then word came,
after certain piercing, harrowing cries, that all was well, and he
was permitted to look at the new arrival. The experience broadened his
conception of things, made him more solid in his judgment of life. That
old conviction of tragedy underlying the surface of things, like wood
under its veneer, was emphasized. Little Frank, and later Lillian,
blue-eyed and golden-haired, touched his imagination for a while. There
was a good deal to this home idea, after all. That was the way life was
organized, and properly so--its cornerstone was the home.

It would be impossible to indicate fully how subtle were the material
changes which these years involved--changes so gradual that they were,
like the lap of soft waters, unnoticeable. Considerable--a great deal,
considering how little he had to begin with--wealth was added in
the next five years. He came, in his financial world, to know fairly
intimately, as commercial relationships go, some of the subtlest
characters of the steadily enlarging financial world. In his days at
Tighe's and on the exchange, many curious figures had been pointed
out to him--State and city officials of one grade and another who were
"making something out of politics," and some national figures who came
from Washington to Philadelphia at times to see Drexel & Co., Clark &
Co., and even Tighe & Co. These men, as he learned, had tips or advance
news of legislative or economic changes which were sure to affect
certain stocks or trade opportunities. A young clerk had once pulled his
sleeve at Tighe's.

"See that man going in to see Tighe?"

"Yes."

"That's Murtagh, the city treasurer. Say, he don't do anything but play
a fine game. All that money to invest, and he don't have to account for
anything except the principal. The interest goes to him."

Cowperwood understood. All these city and State officials speculated.
They had a habit of depositing city and State funds with certain bankers
and brokers as authorized agents or designated State depositories. The
banks paid no interest--save to the officials personally. They loaned
it to certain brokers on the officials' secret order, and the latter
invested it in "sure winners." The bankers got the free use of the money
a part of the time, the brokers another part: the officials made money,
and the brokers received a fat commission. There was a political ring
in Philadelphia in which the mayor, certain members of the council, the
treasurer, the chief of police, the commissioner of public works, and
others shared. It was a case generally of "You scratch my back and I'll
scratch yours." Cowperwood thought it rather shabby work at first,
but many men were rapidly getting rich and no one seemed to care. The
newspapers were always talking about civic patriotism and pride but
never a word about these things. And the men who did them were powerful
and respected.

There were many houses, a constantly widening circle, that found him a
very trustworthy agent in disposing of note issues or note payment. He
seemed to know so quickly where to go to get the money. From the first
he made it a principle to keep twenty thousand dollars in cash on hand
in order to be able to take up a proposition instantly and without
discussion. So, often he was able to say, "Why, certainly, I can do
that," when otherwise, on the face of things, he would not have been
able to do so. He was asked if he would not handle certain stock
transactions on 'change. He had no seat, and he intended not to take
any at first; but now he changed his mind, and bought one, not only
in Philadelphia, but in New York also. A certain Joseph Zimmerman, a
dry-goods man for whom he had handled various note issues, suggested
that he undertake operating in street-railway shares for him, and this
was the beginning of his return to the floor.

In the meanwhile his family life was changing--growing, one might have
said, finer and more secure. Mrs. Cowperwood had, for instance, been
compelled from time to time to make a subtle readjustment of her
personal relationship with people, as he had with his. When Mr.
Semple was alive she had been socially connected with tradesmen
principally--retailers and small wholesalers--a very few. Some of the
women of her own church, the First Presbyterian, were friendly with
her. There had been church teas and sociables which she and Mr. Semple
attended, and dull visits to his relatives and hers. The Cowperwoods,
the Watermans, and a few families of that caliber, had been the notable
exceptions. Now all this was changed. Young Cowperwood did not care
very much for her relatives, and the Semples had been alienated by her
second, and to them outrageous, marriage. His own family was closely
interested by ties of affection and mutual prosperity, but, better than
this, he was drawing to himself some really significant personalities.
He brought home with him, socially--not to talk business, for he
disliked that idea--bankers, investors, customers and prospective
customers. Out on the Schuylkill, the Wissahickon, and elsewhere, were
popular dining places where one could drive on Sunday. He and Mrs.
Cowperwood frequently drove out to Mrs. Seneca Davis's, to Judge
Kitchen's, to the home of Andrew Sharpless, a lawyer whom he knew, to
the home of Harper Steger, his own lawyer, and others. Cowperwood had
the gift of geniality. None of these men or women suspected the depth of
his nature--he was thinking, thinking, thinking, but enjoyed life as he
went.

One of his earliest and most genuine leanings was toward paintings. He
admired nature, but somehow, without knowing why, he fancied one could
best grasp it through the personality of some interpreter, just as we
gain our ideas of law and politics through individuals. Mrs. Cowperwood
cared not a whit one way or another, but she accompanied him to
exhibitions, thinking all the while that Frank was a little peculiar.
He tried, because he loved her, to interest her in these things
intelligently, but while she pretended slightly, she could not really
see or care, and it was very plain that she could not.

The children took up a great deal of her time. However, Cowperwood was
not troubled about this. It struck him as delightful and exceedingly
worth while that she should be so devoted. At the same time, her
lethargic manner, vague smile and her sometimes seeming indifference,
which sprang largely from a sense of absolute security, attracted him
also. She was so different from him! She took her second marriage quite
as she had taken her first--a solemn fact which contained no possibility
of mental alteration. As for himself, however, he was bustling about in
a world which, financially at least, seemed all alteration--there were
so many sudden and almost unheard-of changes. He began to look at her
at times, with a speculative eye--not very critically, for he liked
her--but with an attempt to weigh her personality. He had known her
five years and more now. What did he know about her? The vigor of
youth--those first years--had made up for so many things, but now that
he had her safely...

There came in this period the slow approach, and finally the
declaration, of war between the North and the South, attended with so
much excitement that almost all current minds were notably colored by
it. It was terrific. Then came meetings, public and stirring, and riots;
the incident of John Brown's body; the arrival of Lincoln, the great
commoner, on his way from Springfield, Illinois, to Washington via
Philadelphia, to take the oath of office; the battle of Bull Run; the
battle of Vicksburg; the battle of Gettysburg, and so on. Cowperwood was
only twenty-five at the time, a cool, determined youth, who thought the
slave agitation might be well founded in human rights--no doubt was--but
exceedingly dangerous to trade. He hoped the North would win; but it
might go hard with him personally and other financiers. He did not
care to fight. That seemed silly for the individual man to do. Others
might--there were many poor, thin-minded, half-baked creatures who would
put themselves up to be shot; but they were only fit to be commanded or
shot down. As for him, his life was sacred to himself and his family and
his personal interests. He recalled seeing, one day, in one of the quiet
side streets, as the working-men were coming home from their work, a
small enlisting squad of soldiers in blue marching enthusiastically
along, the Union flag flying, the drummers drumming, the fifes blowing,
the idea being, of course, to so impress the hitherto indifferent or
wavering citizen, to exalt him to such a pitch, that he would lose
his sense of proportion, of self-interest, and, forgetting all--wife,
parents, home, and children--and seeing only the great need of the
country, fall in behind and enlist. He saw one workingman swinging his
pail, and evidently not contemplating any such denouement to his day's
work, pause, listen as the squad approached, hesitate as it drew close,
and as it passed, with a peculiar look of uncertainty or wonder in his
eyes, fall in behind and march solemnly away to the enlisting quarters.
What was it that had caught this man, Frank asked himself. How was he
overcome so easily? He had not intended to go. His face was streaked
with the grease and dirt of his work--he looked like a foundry man or
machinist, say twenty-five years of age. Frank watched the little squad
disappear at the end of the street round the corner under the trees.

This current war-spirit was strange. The people seemed to him to want
to hear nothing but the sound of the drum and fife, to see nothing but
troops, of which there were thousands now passing through on their
way to the front, carrying cold steel in the shape of guns at their
shoulders, to hear of war and the rumors of war. It was a thrilling
sentiment, no doubt, great but unprofitable. It meant self-sacrifice,
and he could not see that. If he went he might be shot, and what would
his noble emotion amount to then? He would rather make money, regulate
current political, social and financial affairs. The poor fool who
fell in behind the enlisting squad--no, not fool, he would not call him
that--the poor overwrought working-man--well, Heaven pity him! Heaven
pity all of them! They really did not know what they were doing.

One day he saw Lincoln--a tall, shambling man, long, bony, gawky, but
tremendously impressive. It was a raw, slushy morning of a late February
day, and the great war President was just through with his solemn
pronunciamento in regard to the bonds that might have been strained but
must not be broken. As he issued from the doorway of Independence Hall,
that famous birthplace of liberty, his face was set in a sad, meditative
calm. Cowperwood looked at him fixedly as he issued from the doorway
surrounded by chiefs of staff, local dignitaries, detectives, and the
curious, sympathetic faces of the public. As he studied the strangely
rough-hewn countenance a sense of the great worth and dignity of the man
came over him.

"A real man, that," he thought; "a wonderful temperament." His every
gesture came upon him with great force. He watched him enter his
carriage, thinking "So that is the railsplitter, the country lawyer.
Well, fate has picked a great man for this crisis."

For days the face of Lincoln haunted him, and very often during the
war his mind reverted to that singular figure. It seemed to him
unquestionable that fortuitously he had been permitted to look upon one
of the world's really great men. War and statesmanship were not for him;
but he knew how important those things were--at times.





Chapter XI


It was while the war was on, and after it was perfectly plain that it
was not to be of a few days' duration, that Cowperwood's first great
financial opportunity came to him. There was a strong demand for money
at the time on the part of the nation, the State, and the city. In July,
1861, Congress had authorized a loan of fifty million dollars, to be
secured by twenty-year bonds with interest not to exceed seven per
cent., and the State authorized a loan of three millions on much the
same security, the first being handled by financiers of Boston, New
York, and Philadelphia, the second by Philadelphia financiers alone.
Cowperwood had no hand in this. He was not big enough. He read in the
papers of gatherings of men whom he knew personally or by reputation,
"to consider the best way to aid the nation or the State"; but he was
not included. And yet his soul yearned to be of them. He noticed
how often a rich man's word sufficed--no money, no certificates, no
collateral, no anything--just his word. If Drexel & Co., or Jay Cooke &
Co., or Gould & Fiske were rumored to be behind anything, how secure
it was! Jay Cooke, a young man in Philadelphia, had made a great strike
taking this State loan in company with Drexel & Co., and selling it at
par. The general opinion was that it ought to be and could only be sold
at ninety. Cooke did not believe this. He believed that State pride
and State patriotism would warrant offering the loan to small banks
and private citizens, and that they would subscribe it fully and more.
Events justified Cooke magnificently, and his public reputation was
assured. Cowperwood wished he could make some such strike; but he was
too practical to worry over anything save the facts and conditions that
were before him.

His chance came about six months later, when it was found that the State
would have to have much more money. Its quota of troops would have to
be equipped and paid. There were measures of defense to be taken, the
treasury to be replenished. A call for a loan of twenty-three million
dollars was finally authorized by the legislature and issued. There was
great talk in the street as to who was to handle it--Drexel & Co. and
Jay Cooke & Co., of course.

Cowperwood pondered over this. If he could handle a fraction of this
great loan now--he could not possibly handle the whole of it, for he
had not the necessary connections--he could add considerably to his
reputation as a broker while making a tidy sum. How much could he
handle? That was the question. Who would take portions of it? His
father's bank? Probably. Waterman & Co.? A little. Judge Kitchen? A
small fraction. The Mills-David Company? Yes. He thought of different
individuals and concerns who, for one reason and another--personal
friendship, good-nature, gratitude for past favors, and so on--would
take a percentage of the seven-percent. bonds through him. He totaled up
his possibilities, and discovered that in all likelihood, with a little
preliminary missionary work, he could dispose of one million dollars if
personal influence, through local political figures, could bring this
much of the loan his way.

One man in particular had grown strong in his estimation as having some
subtle political connection not visible on the surface, and this
was Edward Malia Butler. Butler was a contractor, undertaking the
construction of sewers, water-mains, foundations for buildings,
street-paving, and the like. In the early days, long before Cowperwood
had known him, he had been a garbage-contractor on his own account. The
city at that time had no extended street-cleaning service, particularly
in its outlying sections and some of the older, poorer regions. Edward
Butler, then a poor young Irishman, had begun by collecting and hauling
away the garbage free of charge, and feeding it to his pigs and cattle.
Later he discovered that some people were willing to pay a small charge
for this service. Then a local political character, a councilman friend
of his--they were both Catholics--saw a new point in the whole thing.
Butler could be made official garbage-collector. The council could
vote an annual appropriation for this service. Butler could employ more
wagons than he did now--dozens of them, scores. Not only that, but no
other garbage-collector would be allowed. There were others, but the
official contract awarded him would also, officially, be the end of
the life of any and every disturbing rival. A certain amount of the
profitable proceeds would have to be set aside to assuage the feelings
of those who were not contractors. Funds would have to be loaned at
election time to certain individuals and organizations--but no matter.
The amount would be small. So Butler and Patrick Gavin Comiskey, the
councilman (the latter silently) entered into business relations. Butler
gave up driving a wagon himself. He hired a young man, a smart Irish boy
of his neighborhood, Jimmy Sheehan, to be his assistant, superintendent,
stableman, bookkeeper, and what not. Since he soon began to make between
four and five thousand a year, where before he made two thousand, he
moved into a brick house in an outlying section of the south side, and
sent his children to school. Mrs. Butler gave up making soap and feeding
pigs. And since then times had been exceedingly good with Edward Butler.

He could neither read nor write at first; but now he knew how, of
course. He had learned from association with Mr. Comiskey that there
were other forms of contracting--sewers, water-mains, gas-mains,
street-paving, and the like. Who better than Edward Butler to do it?
He knew the councilmen, many of them. Het met them in the back rooms
of saloons, on Sundays and Saturdays at political picnics, at election
councils and conferences, for as a beneficiary of the city's largess he
was expected to contribute not only money, but advice. Curiously he
had developed a strange political wisdom. He knew a successful man or a
coming man when he saw one. So many of his bookkeepers, superintendents,
time-keepers had graduated into councilmen and state legislators. His
nominees--suggested to political conferences--were so often known to
make good. First he came to have influence in his councilman's ward,
then in his legislative district, then in the city councils of
his party--Whig, of course--and then he was supposed to have an
organization.

Mysterious forces worked for him in council. He was awarded significant
contracts, and he always bid. The garbage business was now a thing of
the past. His eldest boy, Owen, was a member of the State legislature
and a partner in his business affairs. His second son, Callum, was a
clerk in the city water department and an assistant to his father also.
Aileen, his eldest daughter, fifteen years of age, was still in St.
Agatha's, a convent school in Germantown. Norah, his second daughter and
youngest child, thirteen years old, was in attendance at a local private
school conducted by a Catholic sisterhood. The Butler family had
moved away from South Philadelphia into Girard Avenue, near the twelve
hundreds, where a new and rather interesting social life was beginning.
They were not of it, but Edward Butler, contractor, now fifty-five years
of age, worth, say, five hundred thousand dollars, had many political
and financial friends. No longer a "rough neck," but a solid,
reddish-faced man, slightly tanned, with broad shoulders and a solid
chest, gray eyes, gray hair, a typically Irish face made wise and calm
and undecipherable by much experience. His big hands and feet indicated
a day when he had not worn the best English cloth suits and tanned
leather, but his presence was not in any way offensive--rather the
other way about. Though still possessed of a brogue, he was soft-spoken,
winning, and persuasive.

He had been one of the first to become interested in the development of
the street-car system and had come to the conclusion, as had Cowperwood
and many others, that it was going to be a great thing. The money
returns on the stocks or shares he had been induced to buy had been
ample evidence of that, He had dealt through one broker and another,
having failed to get in on the original corporate organizations.
He wanted to pick up such stock as he could in one organization and
another, for he believed they all had a future, and most of all he
wanted to get control of a line or two. In connection with this idea he
was looking for some reliable young man, honest and capable, who
would work under his direction and do what he said. Then he learned of
Cowperwood, and one day sent for him and asked him to call at his house.

Cowperwood responded quickly, for he knew of Butler, his rise, his
connections, his force. He called at the house as directed, one cold,
crisp February morning. He remembered the appearance of the street
afterward--broad, brick-paved sidewalks, macadamized roadway, powdered
over with a light snow and set with young, leafless, scrubby trees
and lamp-posts. Butler's house was not new--he had bought and repaired
it--but it was not an unsatisfactory specimen of the architecture of the
time. It was fifty feet wide, four stories tall, of graystone and with
four wide, white stone steps leading up to the door. The window arches,
framed in white, had U-shaped keystones. There were curtains of lace and
a glimpse of red plush through the windows, which gleamed warm against
the cold and snow outside. A trim Irish maid came to the door and he
gave her his card and was invited into the house.

"Is Mr. Butler home?"

"I'm not sure, sir. I'll find out. He may have gone out."

In a little while he was asked to come upstairs, where he found Butler
in a somewhat commercial-looking room. It had a desk, an office chair,
some leather furnishings, and a bookcase, but no completeness or
symmetry as either an office or a living room. There were several
pictures on the wall--an impossible oil painting, for one thing, dark
and gloomy; a canal and barge scene in pink and nile green for another;
some daguerreotypes of relatives and friends which were not half bad.
Cowperwood noticed one of two girls, one with reddish-gold hair, another
with what appeared to be silky brown. The beautiful silver effect of the
daguerreotype had been tinted. They were pretty girls, healthy, smiling,
Celtic, their heads close together, their eyes looking straight out
at you. He admired them casually, and fancied they must be Butler's
daughters.

"Mr. Cowperwood?" inquired Butler, uttering the name fully with a
peculiar accent on the vowels. (He was a slow-moving man, solemn and
deliberate.) Cowperwood noticed that his body was hale and strong like
seasoned hickory, tanned by wind and rain. The flesh of his cheeks was
pulled taut and there was nothing soft or flabby about him.

"I'm that man."

"I have a little matter of stocks to talk over with you" ("matter"
almost sounded like "mather"), "and I thought you'd better come here
rather than that I should come down to your office. We can be more
private-like, and, besides, I'm not as young as I used to be."

He allowed a semi-twinkle to rest in his eye as he looked his visitor
over.

Cowperwood smiled.

"Well, I hope I can be of service to you," he said, genially.

"I happen to be interested just at present in pickin' up certain
street-railway stocks on 'change. I'll tell you about them later. Won't
you have somethin' to drink? It's a cold morning."

"No, thanks; I never drink."

"Never? That's a hard word when it comes to whisky. Well, no matter.
It's a good rule. My boys don't touch anything, and I'm glad of it. As I
say, I'm interested in pickin' up a few stocks on 'change; but, to tell
you the truth, I'm more interested in findin' some clever young felly
like yourself through whom I can work. One thing leads to another, you
know, in this world." And he looked at his visitor non-committally, and
yet with a genial show of interest.

"Quite so," replied Cowperwood, with a friendly gleam in return.

"Well," Butler meditated, half to himself, half to Cowperwood, "there
are a number of things that a bright young man could do for me in the
street if he were so minded. I have two bright boys of my own, but I
don't want them to become stock-gamblers, and I don't know that
they would or could if I wanted them to. But this isn't a matter of
stock-gambling. I'm pretty busy as it is, and, as I said awhile ago, I'm
getting along. I'm not as light on my toes as I once was. But if I had
the right sort of a young man--I've been looking into your record,
by the way, never fear--he might handle a number of little
things--investments and loans--which might bring us each a little
somethin'. Sometimes the young men around town ask advice of me in one
way and another--they have a little somethin' to invest, and so--"

He paused and looked tantalizingly out of the window, knowing full
well Cowperwood was greatly interested, and that this talk of political
influence and connections could only whet his appetite. Butler wanted
him to see clearly that fidelity was the point in this case--fidelity,
tact, subtlety, and concealment.

"Well, if you have been looking into my record," observed Cowperwood,
with his own elusive smile, leaving the thought suspended.

Butler felt the force of the temperament and the argument. He liked
the young man's poise and balance. A number of people had spoken of
Cowperwood to him. (It was now Cowperwood & Co. The company was fiction
purely.) He asked him something about the street; how the market was
running; what he knew about street-railways. Finally he outlined his
plan of buying all he could of the stock of two given lines--the Ninth
and Tenth and the Fifteenth and Sixteenth--without attracting any
attention, if possible. It was to be done slowly, part on 'change, part
from individual holders. He did not tell him that there was a certain
amount of legislative pressure he hoped to bring to bear to get him
franchises for extensions in the regions beyond where the lines now
ended, in order that when the time came for them to extend their
facilities they would have to see him or his sons, who might be large
minority stockholders in these very concerns. It was a far-sighted plan,
and meant that the lines would eventually drop into his or his sons'
basket.

"I'll be delighted to work with you, Mr. Butler, in any way that you
may suggest," observed Cowperwood. "I can't say that I have so much of a
business as yet--merely prospects. But my connections are good. I am
now a member of the New York and Philadelphia exchanges. Those who have
dealt with me seem to like the results I get."

"I know a little something about your work already," reiterated Butler,
wisely.

"Very well, then; whenever you have a commission you can call at
my office, or write, or I will call here. I will give you my secret
operating code, so that anything you say will be strictly confidential."

"Well, we'll not say anything more now. In a few days I'll have
somethin' for you. When I do, you can draw on my bank for what you need,
up to a certain amount." He got up and looked out into the street, and
Cowperwood also arose.

"It's a fine day now, isn't it?"

"It surely is."

"Well, we'll get to know each other better, I'm sure."

He held out his hand.

"I hope so."

Cowperwood went out, Butler accompanying him to the door. As he did so a
young girl bounded in from the street, red-cheeked, blue-eyed, wearing a
scarlet cape with the peaked hood thrown over her red-gold hair.

"Oh, daddy, I almost knocked you down."

She gave her father, and incidentally Cowperwood, a gleaming, radiant,
inclusive smile. Her teeth were bright and small, and her lips bud-red.

"You're home early. I thought you were going to stay all day?"

"I was, but I changed my mind."

She passed on in, swinging her arms.

"Yes, well--" Butler continued, when she had gone. "Then well leave it
for a day or two. Good day."

"Good day."

Cowperwood, warm with this enhancing of his financial prospects, went
down the steps; but incidentally he spared a passing thought for the gay
spirit of youth that had manifested itself in this red-cheeked maiden.
What a bright, healthy, bounding girl! Her voice had the subtle,
vigorous ring of fifteen or sixteen. She was all vitality. What a fine
catch for some young fellow some day, and her father would make him
rich, no doubt, or help to.





Chapter XII


It was to Edward Malia Butler that Cowperwood turned now, some nineteen
months later when he was thinking of the influence that might bring him
an award of a portion of the State issue of bonds. Butler could probably
be interested to take some of them himself, or could help him place
some. He had come to like Cowperwood very much and was now being carried
on the latter's books as a prospective purchaser of large blocks of
stocks. And Cowperwood liked this great solid Irishman. He liked his
history. He had met Mrs. Butler, a rather fat and phlegmatic Irish woman
with a world of hard sense who cared nothing at all for show and who
still liked to go into the kitchen and superintend the cooking. He had
met Owen and Callum Butler, the boys, and Aileen and Norah, the girls.
Aileen was the one who had bounded up the steps the first day he had
called at the Butler house several seasons before.

There was a cozy grate-fire burning in Butler's improvised private
office when Cowperwood called. Spring was coming on, but the evenings
were cool. The older man invited Cowperwood to make himself comfortable
in one of the large leather chairs before the fire and then proceeded to
listen to his recital of what he hoped to accomplish.

"Well, now, that isn't so easy," he commented at the end. "You ought to
know more about that than I do. I'm not a financier, as you well know."
And he grinned apologetically.

"It's a matter of influence," went on Cowperwood. "And favoritism.
That I know. Drexel & Company and Cooke & Company have connections at
Harrisburg. They have men of their own looking after their interests.
The attorney-general and the State treasurer are hand in glove with
them. Even if I put in a bid, and can demonstrate that I can handle the
loan, it won't help me to get it. Other people have done that. I have to
have friends--influence. You know how it is."

"Them things," Butler said, "is easy enough if you know the right
parties to approach. Now there's Jimmy Oliver--he ought to know
something about that." Jimmy Oliver was the whilom district attorney
serving at this time, and incidentally free adviser to Mr. Butler in
many ways. He was also, accidentally, a warm personal friend of the
State treasurer.

"How much of the loan do you want?"

"Five million."

"Five million!" Butler sat up. "Man, what are you talking about? That's
a good deal of money. Where are you going to sell all that?"

"I want to bid for five million," assuaged Cowperwood, softly. "I only
want one million but I want the prestige of putting in a bona fide bid
for five million. It will do me good on the street."

Butler sank back somewhat relieved.

"Five million! Prestige! You want one million. Well, now, that's
different. That's not such a bad idea. We ought to be able to get that."

He rubbed his chin some more and stared into the fire.

And Cowperwood felt confident when he left the house that evening that
Butler would not fail him but would set the wheels working. Therefore,
he was not surprised, and knew exactly what it meant, when a few days
later he was introduced to City Treasurer Julian Bode, who promised to
introduce him to State Treasurer Van Nostrand and to see that his claims
to consideration were put before the people. "Of course, you know,"
he said to Cowperwood, in the presence of Butler, for it was at the
latter's home that the conference took place, "this banking crowd is
very powerful. You know who they are. They don't want any interference
in this bond issue business. I was talking to Terrence Relihan, who
represents them up there"--meaning Harrisburg, the State capital--"and
he says they won't stand for it at all. You may have trouble right here
in Philadelphia after you get it--they're pretty powerful, you know. Are
you sure just where you can place it?"

"Yes, I'm sure," replied Cowperwood.

"Well, the best thing in my judgment is not to say anything at all. Just
put in your bid. Van Nostrand, with the governor's approval, will make
the award. We can fix the governor, I think. After you get it they may
talk to you personally, but that's your business."

Cowperwood smiled his inscrutable smile. There were so many ins and outs
to this financial life. It was an endless network of underground holes,
along which all sorts of influences were moving. A little wit, a little
nimbleness, a little luck-time and opportunity--these sometimes availed.
Here he was, through his ambition to get on, and nothing else, coming
into contact with the State treasurer and the governor. They were
going to consider his case personally, because he demanded that it be
considered--nothing more. Others more influential than himself had
quite as much right to a share, but they didn't take it. Nerve, ideas,
aggressiveness, how these counted when one had luck!

He went away thinking how surprised Drexel & Co. and Cooke & Co. would
be to see him appearing in the field as a competitor. In his home, in a
little room on the second floor next his bedroom, which he had fixed up
as an office with a desk, a safe, and a leather chair, he consulted his
resources. There were so many things to think of. He went over again the
list of people whom he had seen and whom he could count on to
subscribe, and in so far as that was concerned--the award of one million
dollars--he was safe. He figured to make two per cent. on the total
transaction, or twenty thousand dollars. If he did he was going to buy
a house out on Girard Avenue beyond the Butlers', or, better yet, buy a
piece of ground and erect one; mortgaging house and property so to do.
His father was prospering nicely. He might want to build a house next to
him, and they could live side by side. His own business, aside from this
deal, would yield him ten thousand dollars this year. His street-car
investments, aggregating fifty thousand, were paying six per cent. His
wife's property, represented by this house, some government bonds, and
some real estate in West Philadelphia amounted to forty thousand more.
Between them they were rich; but he expected to be much richer. All he
needed now was to keep cool. If he succeeded in this bond-issue matter,
he could do it again and on a larger scale. There would be more issues.
He turned out the light after a while and went into his wife's boudoir,
where she was sleeping. The nurse and the children were in a room
beyond.

"Well, Lillian," he observed, when she awoke and turned over toward him,
"I think I have that bond matter that I was telling you about arranged
at last. I think I'll get a million of it, anyhow. That'll mean twenty
thousand. If I do we'll build out on Girard Avenue. That's going to be
the street. The college is making that neighborhood."

"That'll be fine, won't it, Frank!" she observed, and rubbed his arm as
he sat on the side of the bed.

Her remark was vaguely speculative.

"We'll have to show the Butlers some attention from now on. He's been
very nice to me and he's going to be useful--I can see that. He asked me
to bring you over some time. We must go. Be nice to his wife. He can do
a lot for me if he wants to. He has two daughters, too. We'll have to
have them over here."

"I'll have them to dinner sometime," she agreed cheerfully and
helpfully, "and I'll stop and take Mrs. Butler driving if she'll go, or
she can take me."

She had already learned that the Butlers were rather showy--the younger
generation--that they were sensitive as to their lineage, and that money
in their estimation was supposed to make up for any deficiency in any
other respect. "Butler himself is a very presentable man," Cowperwood
had once remarked to her, "but Mrs. Butler--well, she's all right,
but she's a little commonplace. She's a fine woman, though, I think,
good-natured and good-hearted." He cautioned her not to overlook Aileen
and Norah, because the Butlers, mother and father, were very proud of
them.

Mrs. Cowperwood at this time was thirty-two years old; Cowperwood
twenty-seven. The birth and care of two children had made some
difference in her looks. She was no longer as softly pleasing, more
angular. Her face was hollow-cheeked, like so many of Rossetti's
and Burne-Jones's women. Her health was really not as good as it had
been--the care of two children and a late undiagnosed tendency toward
gastritis having reduced her. In short she was a little run down
nervously and suffered from fits of depression. Cowperwood had noticed
this. He tried to be gentle and considerate, but he was too much of a
utilitarian and practical-minded observer not to realize that he was
likely to have a sickly wife on his hands later. Sympathy and affection
were great things, but desire and charm must endure or one was compelled
to be sadly conscious of their loss. So often now he saw young girls who
were quite in his mood, and who were exceedingly robust and joyous. It
was fine, advisable, practical, to adhere to the virtues as laid down
in the current social lexicon, but if you had a sickly wife--And anyhow,
was a man entitled to only one wife? Must he never look at another
woman? Supposing he found some one? He pondered those things between
hours of labor, and concluded that it did not make so much difference.
If a man could, and not be exposed, it was all right. He had to be
careful, though. Tonight, as he sat on the side of his wife's bed, he
was thinking somewhat of this, for he had seen Aileen Butler again,
playing and singing at her piano as he passed the parlor door. She was
like a bright bird radiating health and enthusiasm--a reminder of youth
in general.

"It's a strange world," he thought; but his thoughts were his own, and
he didn't propose to tell any one about them.

The bond issue, when it came, was a curious compromise; for, although it
netted him his twenty thousand dollars and more and served to
introduce him to the financial notice of Philadelphia and the State of
Pennsylvania, it did not permit him to manipulate the subscriptions as
he had planned. The State treasurer was seen by him at the office of a
local lawyer of great repute, where he worked when in the city. He was
gracious to Cowperwood, because he had to be. He explained to him just
how things were regulated at Harrisburg. The big financiers were looked
to for campaign funds. They were represented by henchmen in the State
assembly and senate. The governor and the treasurer were foot-free;
but there were other influences--prestige, friendship, social power,
political ambitions, etc. The big men might constitute a close
corporation, which in itself was unfair; but, after all, they were the
legitimate sponsors for big money loans of this kind. The State had to
keep on good terms with them, especially in times like these. Seeing
that Mr. Cowperwood was so well able to dispose of the million he
expected to get, it would be perfectly all right to award it to him; but
Van Nostrand had a counter-proposition to make. Would Cowperwood, if the
financial crowd now handling the matter so desired, turn over his award
to them for a consideration--a sum equal to what he expected to make--in
the event the award was made to him? Certain financiers desired this. It
was dangerous to oppose them. They were perfectly willing he should
put in a bid for five million and get the prestige of that; to have him
awarded one million and get the prestige of that was well enough also,
but they desired to handle the twenty-three million dollars in an
unbroken lot. It looked better. He need not be advertised as having
withdrawn. They would be content to have him achieve the glory of having
done what he started out to do. Just the same the example was bad.
Others might wish to imitate him. If it were known in the street
privately that he had been coerced, for a consideration, into giving up,
others would be deterred from imitating him in the future. Besides, if
he refused, they could cause him trouble. His loans might be called.
Various banks might not be so friendly in the future. His constituents
might be warned against him in one way or another.

Cowperwood saw the point. He acquiesced. It was something to have
brought so many high and mighties to their knees. So they knew of him!
They were quite well aware of him! Well and good. He would take the
award and twenty thousand or thereabouts and withdraw. The State
treasurer was delighted. It solved a ticklish proposition for him.

"I'm glad to have seen you," he said. "I'm glad we've met. I'll drop
in and talk with you some time when I'm down this way. We'll have lunch
together."

The State treasurer, for some odd reason, felt that Mr. Cowperwood was
a man who could make him some money. His eye was so keen; his expression
was so alert, and yet so subtle. He told the governor and some other of
his associates about him.

So the award was finally made; Cowperwood, after some private
negotiations in which he met the officers of Drexel & Co., was paid his
twenty thousand dollars and turned his share of the award over to them.
New faces showed up in his office now from time to time--among them that
of Van Nostrand and one Terrence Relihan, a representative of some other
political forces at Harrisburg. He was introduced to the governor one
day at lunch. His name was mentioned in the papers, and his prestige
grew rapidly.

Immediately he began working on plans with young Ellsworth for his new
house. He was going to build something exceptional this time, he told
Lillian. They were going to have to do some entertaining--entertaining
on a larger scale than ever. North Front Street was becoming too tame.
He put the house up for sale, consulted with his father and found that
he also was willing to move. The son's prosperity had redounded to the
credit of the father. The directors of the bank were becoming much more
friendly to the old man. Next year President Kugel was going to retire.
Because of his son's noted coup, as well as his long service, he was
going to be made president. Frank was a large borrower from his father's
bank. By the same token he was a large depositor. His connection
with Edward Butler was significant. He sent his father's bank certain
accounts which it otherwise could not have secured. The city treasurer
became interested in it, and the State treasurer. Cowperwood, Sr., stood
to earn twenty thousand a year as president, and he owed much of it
to his son. The two families were now on the best of terms. Anna, now
twenty-one, and Edward and Joseph frequently spent the night at Frank's
house. Lillian called almost daily at his mother's. There was much
interchange of family gossip, and it was thought well to build side by
side. So Cowperwood, Sr., bought fifty feet of ground next to his son's
thirty-five, and together they commenced the erection of two charming,
commodious homes, which were to be connected by a covered passageway, or
pergola, which could be inclosed with glass in winter.

The most popular local stone, a green granite was chosen; but Mr.
Ellsworth promised to present it in such a way that it would be
especially pleasing. Cowperwood, Sr., decided that he could afford to
spent seventy-five thousand dollars--he was now worth two hundred and
fifty thousand; and Frank decided that he could risk fifty, seeing
that he could raise money on a mortgage. He planned at the same time to
remove his office farther south on Third Street and occupy a building
of his own. He knew where an option was to be had on a twenty-five-foot
building, which, though old, could be given a new brownstone front and
made very significant. He saw in his mind's eye a handsome building,
fitted with an immense plate-glass window; inside his hardwood fixtures
visible; and over the door, or to one side of it, set in bronze letters,
Cowperwood & Co. Vaguely but surely he began to see looming before him,
like a fleecy tinted cloud on the horizon, his future fortune. He was to
be rich, very, very rich.





Chapter XIII


During all the time that Cowperwood had been building himself up thus
steadily the great war of the rebellion had been fought almost to its
close. It was now October, 1864. The capture of Mobile and the Battle of
the Wilderness were fresh memories. Grant was now before Petersburg, and
the great general of the South, Lee, was making that last brilliant and
hopeless display of his ability as a strategist and a soldier. There had
been times--as, for instance, during the long, dreary period in which
the country was waiting for Vicksburg to fall, for the Army of the
Potomac to prove victorious, when Pennsylvania was invaded by Lee--when
stocks fell and commercial conditions were very bad generally. In
times like these Cowperwood's own manipulative ability was taxed to the
utmost, and he had to watch every hour to see that his fortune was not
destroyed by some unexpected and destructive piece of news.

His personal attitude toward the war, however, and aside from his
patriotic feeling that the Union ought to be maintained, was that it
was destructive and wasteful. He was by no means so wanting in patriotic
emotion and sentiment but that he could feel that the Union, as it had
now come to be, spreading its great length from the Atlantic to the
Pacific and from the snows of Canada to the Gulf, was worth while.
Since his birth in 1837 he had seen the nation reach that physical
growth--barring Alaska--which it now possesses. Not so much earlier than
his youth Florida had been added to the Union by purchase from Spain;
Mexico, after the unjust war of 1848, had ceded Texas and the territory
to the West. The boundary disputes between England and the United States
in the far Northwest had been finally adjusted. To a man with great
social and financial imagination, these facts could not help but be
significant; and if they did nothing more, they gave him a sense of the
boundless commercial possibilities which existed potentially in so
vast a realm. His was not the order of speculative financial enthusiasm
which, in the type known as the "promoter," sees endless possibilities
for gain in every unexplored rivulet and prairie reach; but the very
vastness of the country suggested possibilities which he hoped might
remain undisturbed. A territory covering the length of a whole zone and
between two seas, seemed to him to possess potentialities which it could
not retain if the States of the South were lost.

At the same time, the freedom of the negro was not a significant point
with him. He had observed that race from his boyhood with considerable
interest, and had been struck with virtues and defects which seemed
inherent and which plainly, to him, conditioned their experiences.

He was not at all sure, for instance, that the negroes could be made
into anything much more significant than they were. At any rate, it was
a long uphill struggle for them, of which many future generations would
not witness the conclusion. He had no particular quarrel with the theory
that they should be free; he saw no particular reason why the South
should not protest vigorously against the destruction of their property
and their system. It was too bad that the negroes as slaves should be
abused in some instances. He felt sure that that ought to be adjusted
in some way; but beyond that he could not see that there was any great
ethical basis for the contentions of their sponsors. The vast majority
of men and women, as he could see, were not essentially above slavery,
even when they had all the guarantees of a constitution formulated to
prevent it. There was mental slavery, the slavery of the weak mind
and the weak body. He followed the contentions of such men as Sumner,
Garrison, Phillips, and Beecher, with considerable interest; but at no
time could he see that the problem was a vital one for him. He did
not care to be a soldier or an officer of soldiers; he had no gift for
polemics; his mind was not of the disputatious order--not even in
the realm of finance. He was concerned only to see what was of vast
advantage to him, and to devote all his attention to that. This
fratricidal war in the nation could not help him. It really delayed, he
thought, the true commercial and financial adjustment of the country,
and he hoped that it would soon end. He was not of those who complained
bitterly of the excessive war taxes, though he knew them to be trying to
many. Some of the stories of death and disaster moved him greatly; but,
alas, they were among the unaccountable fortunes of life, and could
not be remedied by him. So he had gone his way day by day, watching
the coming in and the departing of troops, seeing the bands of dirty,
disheveled, gaunt, sickly men returning from the fields and hospitals;
and all he could do was to feel sorry. This war was not for him. He had
taken no part in it, and he felt sure that he could only rejoice in
its conclusion--not as a patriot, but as a financier. It was wasteful,
pathetic, unfortunate.

The months proceeded apace. A local election intervened and there was a
new city treasurer, a new assessor of taxes, and a new mayor; but Edward
Malia Butler continued to have apparently the same influence as before.
The Butlers and the Cowperwoods had become quite friendly. Mrs. Butler
rather liked Lillian, though they were of different religious beliefs;
and they went driving or shopping together, the younger woman a little
critical and ashamed of the elder because of her poor grammar, her
Irish accent, her plebeian tastes--as though the Wiggins had not been as
plebeian as any. On the other hand the old lady, as she was compelled to
admit, was good-natured and good-hearted. She loved to give, since she
had plenty, and sent presents here and there to Lillian, the children,
and others. "Now youse must come over and take dinner with us"--the
Butlers had arrived at the evening-dinner period--or "Youse must come
drive with me to-morrow."

"Aileen, God bless her, is such a foine girl," or "Norah, the darlin',
is sick the day."

But Aileen, her airs, her aggressive disposition, her love of attention,
her vanity, irritated and at times disgusted Mrs. Cowperwood. She was
eighteen now, with a figure which was subtly provocative. Her manner
was boyish, hoydenish at times, and although convent-trained, she was
inclined to balk at restraint in any form. But there was a softness
lurking in her blue eyes that was most sympathetic and human.

St. Timothy's and the convent school in Germantown had been the choice
of her parents for her education--what they called a good Catholic
education. She had learned a great deal about the theory and forms of
the Catholic ritual, but she could not understand them. The church, with
its tall, dimly radiant windows, its high, white altar, its figure of
St. Joseph on one side and the Virgin Mary on the other, clothed in
golden-starred robes of blue, wearing haloes and carrying scepters, had
impressed her greatly. The church as a whole--any Catholic church--was
beautiful to look at--soothing. The altar, during high mass, lit with a
half-hundred or more candles, and dignified and made impressive by the
rich, lacy vestments of the priests and the acolytes, the impressive
needlework and gorgeous colorings of the amice, chasuble, cope, stole,
and maniple, took her fancy and held her eye. Let us say there was
always lurking in her a sense of grandeur coupled with a love of color
and a love of love. From the first she was somewhat sex-conscious. She
had no desire for accuracy, no desire for precise information. Innate
sensuousness rarely has. It basks in sunshine, bathes in color, dwells
in a sense of the impressive and the gorgeous, and rests there. Accuracy
is not necessary except in the case of aggressive, acquisitive natures,
when it manifests itself in a desire to seize. True controlling
sensuousness cannot be manifested in the most active dispositions, nor
again in the most accurate.

There is need of defining these statements in so far as they apply
to Aileen. It would scarcely be fair to describe her nature as being
definitely sensual at this time. It was too rudimentary. Any harvest is
of long growth. The confessional, dim on Friday and Saturday evenings,
when the church was lighted by but a few lamps, and the priest's
warnings, penances, and ecclesiastical forgiveness whispered through
the narrow lattice, moved her as something subtly pleasing. She was not
afraid of her sins. Hell, so definitely set forth, did not frighten her.
Really, it had not laid hold on her conscience. The old women and old
men hobbling into church, bowed in prayer, murmuring over their beads,
were objects of curious interest like the wood-carvings in the peculiar
array of wood-reliefs emphasizing the Stations of the Cross. She herself
had liked to confess, particularly when she was fourteen and fifteen,
and to listen to the priest's voice as he admonished her with, "Now,
my dear child." A particularly old priest, a French father, who came
to hear their confessions at school, interested her as being kind and
sweet. His forgiveness and blessing seemed sincere--better than her
prayers, which she went through perfunctorily. And then there was a
young priest at St. Timothy's, Father David, hale and rosy, with a curl
of black hair over his forehead, and an almost jaunty way of wearing his
priestly hat, who came down the aisle Sundays sprinkling holy water
with a definite, distinguished sweep of the hand, who took her fancy.
He heard confessions and now and then she liked to whisper her strange
thoughts to him while she actually speculated on what he might privately
be thinking. She could not, if she tried, associate him with any divine
authority. He was too young, too human. There was something a little
malicious, teasing, in the way she delighted to tell him about herself,
and then walk demurely, repentantly out. At St. Agatha's she had been
rather a difficult person to deal with. She was, as the good sisters of
the school had readily perceived, too full of life, too active, to be
easily controlled. "That Miss Butler," once observed Sister Constantia,
the Mother Superior, to Sister Sempronia, Aileen's immediate mentor,
"is a very spirited girl, you may have a great deal of trouble with her
unless you use a good deal of tact. You may have to coax her with little
gifts. You will get on better." So Sister Sempronia had sought to find
what Aileen was most interested in, and bribe her therewith. Being
intensely conscious of her father's competence, and vain of her personal
superiority, it was not so easy to do. She had wanted to go home
occasionally, though; she had wanted to be allowed to wear the sister's
rosary of large beads with its pendent cross of ebony and its silver
Christ, and this was held up as a great privilege. For keeping quiet in
class, walking softly, and speaking softly--as much as it was in her to
do--for not stealing into other girl's rooms after lights were out, and
for abandoning crushes on this and that sympathetic sister, these awards
and others, such as walking out in the grounds on Saturday afternoons,
being allowed to have all the flowers she wanted, some extra dresses,
jewels, etc., were offered. She liked music and the idea of painting,
though she had no talent in that direction; and books, novels,
interested her, but she could not get them. The rest--grammar, spelling,
sewing, church and general history--she loathed. Deportment--well, there
was something in that. She had liked the rather exaggerated curtsies
they taught her, and she had often reflected on how she would use them
when she reached home.

When she came out into life the little social distinctions which have
been indicated began to impress themselves on her, and she wished
sincerely that her father would build a better home--a mansion--such as
those she saw elsewhere, and launch her properly in society. Failing in
that, she could think of nothing save clothes, jewels, riding-horses,
carriages, and the appropriate changes of costume which were allowed her
for these. Her family could not entertain in any distinguished way where
they were, and so already, at eighteen, she was beginning to feel the
sting of a blighted ambition. She was eager for life. How was she to get
it?

Her room was a study in the foibles of an eager and ambitious mind. It
was full of clothes, beautiful things for all occasions--jewelry--which
she had small opportunity to wear--shoes, stockings, lingerie, laces. In
a crude way she had made a study of perfumes and cosmetics, though she
needed the latter not at all, and these were present in abundance.
She was not very orderly, and she loved lavishness of display; and
her curtains, hangings, table ornaments, and pictures inclined to
gorgeousness, which did not go well with the rest of the house.

Aileen always reminded Cowperwood of a high-stepping horse without a
check-rein. He met her at various times, shopping with her mother, out
driving with her father, and he was always interested and amused at the
affected, bored tone she assumed before him--the "Oh, dear! Oh, dear!
Life is so tiresome, don't you know," when, as a matter of fact, every
moment of it was of thrilling interest to her. Cowperwood took her
mental measurement exactly. A girl with a high sense of life in her,
romantic, full of the thought of love and its possibilities. As he
looked at her he had the sense of seeing the best that nature can do
when she attempts to produce physical perfection. The thought came to
him that some lucky young dog would marry her pretty soon and carry her
away; but whoever secured her would have to hold her by affection and
subtle flattery and attention if he held her at all.

"The little snip"--she was not at all--"she thinks the sun rises and
sets in her father's pocket," Lillian observed one day to her husband.
"To hear her talk, you'd think they were descended from Irish kings. Her
pretended interest in art and music amuses me."

"Oh, don't be too hard on her," coaxed Cowperwood diplomatically. He
already liked Aileen very much. "She plays very well, and she has a good
voice."

"Yes, I know; but she has no real refinement. How could she have? Look
at her father and mother."

"I don't see anything so very much the matter with her," insisted
Cowperwood. "She's bright and good-looking. Of course, she's only a
girl, and a little vain, but she'll come out of that. She isn't without
sense and force, at that."

Aileen, as he knew, was most friendly to him. She liked him. She made a
point of playing the piano and singing for him in his home, and she sang
only when he was there. There was something about his steady, even gait,
his stocky body and handsome head, which attracted her. In spite of
her vanity and egotism, she felt a little overawed before him at
times--keyed up. She seemed to grow gayer and more brilliant in his
presence.

The most futile thing in this world is any attempt, perhaps, at
exact definition of character. All individuals are a bundle of
contradictions--none more so than the most capable.

In the case of Aileen Butler it would be quite impossible to give
an exact definition. Intelligence, of a raw, crude order she had
certainly--also a native force, tamed somewhat by the doctrines and
conventions of current society, still showed clear at times in an
elemental and not entirely unattractive way. At this time she was only
eighteen years of age--decidedly attractive from the point of view of a
man of Frank Cowperwood's temperament. She supplied something he had not
previously known or consciously craved. Vitality and vivacity. No other
woman or girl whom he had ever known had possessed so much innate
force as she. Her red-gold hair--not so red as decidedly golden with a
suggestion of red in it--looped itself in heavy folds about her forehead
and sagged at the base of her neck. She had a beautiful nose, not
sensitive, but straight-cut with small nostril openings, and eyes that
were big and yet noticeably sensuous. They were, to him, a pleasing
shade of blue-gray-blue, and her toilet, due to her temperament, of
course, suggested almost undue luxury, the bangles, anklets, ear-rings,
and breast-plates of the odalisque, and yet, of course, they were not
there. She confessed to him years afterward that she would have loved
to have stained her nails and painted the palms of her hands with
madder-red. Healthy and vigorous, she was chronically interested in
men--what they would think of her--and how she compared with other
women.

The fact that she could ride in a carriage, live in a fine home on
Girard Avenue, visit such homes as those of the Cowperwoods and others,
was of great weight; and yet, even at this age, she realized that life
was more than these things. Many did not have them and lived.

But these facts of wealth and advantage gripped her; and when she sat at
the piano and played or rode in her carriage or walked or stood before
her mirror, she was conscious of her figure, her charms, what they
meant to men, how women envied her. Sometimes she looked at poor,
hollow-chested or homely-faced girls and felt sorry for them; at other
times she flared into inexplicable opposition to some handsome girl or
woman who dared to brazen her socially or physically. There were such
girls of the better families who, in Chestnut Street, in the expensive
shops, or on the drive, on horseback or in carriages, tossed their heads
and indicated as well as human motions can that they were better-bred
and knew it. When this happened each stared defiantly at the other. She
wanted ever so much to get up in the world, and yet namby-pamby men
of better social station than herself did not attract her at all. She
wanted a man. Now and then there was one "something like," but not
entirely, who appealed to her, but most of them were politicians or
legislators, acquaintances of her father, and socially nothing at
all--and so they wearied and disappointed her. Her father did not know
the truly elite. But Mr. Cowperwood--he seemed so refined, so forceful,
and so reserved. She often looked at Mrs. Cowperwood and thought how
fortunate she was.





Chapter XIV


The development of Cowperwood as Cowperwood & Co. following his
arresting bond venture, finally brought him into relationship with one
man who was to play an important part in his life, morally,
financially, and in other ways. This was George W. Stener, the new city
treasurer-elect, who, to begin with, was a puppet in the hands of
other men, but who, also in spite of this fact, became a personage of
considerable importance, for the simple reason that he was weak. Stener
had been engaged in the real estate and insurance business in a small
way before he was made city treasurer. He was one of those men, of whom
there are so many thousands in every large community, with no breadth
of vision, no real subtlety, no craft, no great skill in anything. You
would never hear a new idea emanating from Stener. He never had one in
his life. On the other hand, he was not a bad fellow. He had a stodgy,
dusty, commonplace look to him which was more a matter of mind than of
body. His eye was of vague gray-blue; his hair a dusty light-brown and
thin. His mouth--there was nothing impressive there. He was quite tall,
nearly six feet, with moderately broad shoulders, but his figure was
anything but shapely. He seemed to stoop a little, his stomach was the
least bit protuberant, and he talked commonplaces--the small change of
newspaper and street and business gossip. People liked him in his own
neighborhood. He was thought to be honest and kindly; and he was, as far
as he knew. His wife and four children were as average and insignificant
as the wives and children of such men usually are.

Just the same, and in spite of, or perhaps, politically speaking,
because of all this, George W. Stener was brought into temporary public
notice by certain political methods which had existed in Philadelphia
practically unmodified for the previous half hundred years. First,
because he was of the same political faith as the dominant local
political party, he had become known to the local councilman and
ward-leader of his ward as a faithful soul--one useful in the matter
of drumming up votes. And next--although absolutely without value as
a speaker, for he had no ideas--you could send him from door to door,
asking the grocer and the blacksmith and the butcher how he felt about
things and he would make friends, and in the long run predict fairly
accurately the probable vote. Furthermore, you could dole him out a few
platitudes and he would repeat them. The Republican party, which was the
new-born party then, but dominant in Philadelphia, needed your vote; it
was necessary to keep the rascally Democrats out--he could scarcely have
said why. They had been for slavery. They were for free trade. It never
once occurred to him that these things had nothing to do with the local
executive and financial administration of Philadelphia. Supposing they
didn't? What of it?

In Philadelphia at this time a certain United States Senator, one Mark
Simpson, together with Edward Malia Butler and Henry A. Mollenhauer,
a rich coal dealer and investor, were supposed to, and did, control
jointly the political destiny of the city. They had representatives,
benchmen, spies, tools--a great company. Among them was this same
Stener--a minute cog in the silent machinery of their affairs.

In scarcely any other city save this, where the inhabitants were of a
deadly average in so far as being commonplace was concerned, could such
a man as Stener have been elected city treasurer. The rank and file
did not, except in rare instances, make up their political program. An
inside ring had this matter in charge. Certain positions were allotted
to such and such men or to such and such factions of the party for such
and such services rendered--but who does not know politics?

In due course of time, therefore, George W. Stener had become persona
grata to Edward Strobik, a quondam councilman who afterward became ward
leader and still later president of council, and who, in private life
was a stone-dealer and owner of a brickyard. Strobik was a benchman
of Henry A. Mollenhauer, the hardest and coldest of all three of the
political leaders. The latter had things to get from council, and
Strobik was his tool. He had Stener elected; and because he was
faithful in voting as he was told the latter was later made an assistant
superintendent of the highways department.

Here he came under the eyes of Edward Malia Butler, and was slightly
useful to him. Then the central political committee, with Butler in
charge, decided that some nice, docile man who would at the same time be
absolutely faithful was needed for city treasurer, and Stener was put on
the ticket. He knew little of finance, but was an excellent bookkeeper;
and, anyhow, was not corporation counsel Regan, another political tool
of this great triumvirate, there to advise him at all times? He was.
It was a very simple matter. Being put on the ticket was equivalent to
being elected, and so, after a few weeks of exceedingly trying
platform experiences, in which he had stammered through platitudinous
declarations that the city needed to be honestly administered, he was
inducted into office; and there you were.

Now it wouldn't have made so much difference what George W. Stener's
executive and financial qualifications for the position were, but
at this time the city of Philadelphia was still hobbling along under
perhaps as evil a financial system, or lack of it, as any city ever
endured--the assessor and the treasurer being allowed to collect and
hold moneys belonging to the city, outside of the city's private vaults,
and that without any demand on the part of anybody that the same be
invested by them at interest for the city's benefit. Rather, all they
were expected to do, apparently, was to restore the principal and
that which was with them when they entered or left office. It was not
understood or publicly demanded that the moneys so collected, or
drawn from any source, be maintained intact in the vaults of the city
treasury. They could be loaned out, deposited in banks or used to
further private interests of any one, so long as the principal was
returned, and no one was the wiser. Of course, this theory of
finance was not publicly sanctioned, but it was known politically and
journalistically, and in high finance. How were you to stop it?

Cowperwood, in approaching Edward Malia Butler, had been unconsciously
let in on this atmosphere of erratic and unsatisfactory speculation
without really knowing it. When he had left the office of Tighe & Co.,
seven years before, it was with the idea that henceforth and forever he
would have nothing to do with the stock-brokerage proposition; but now
behold him back in it again, with more vim than he had ever displayed,
for now he was working for himself, the firm of Cowperwood & Co., and
he was eager to satisfy the world of new and powerful individuals who by
degrees were drifting to him. All had a little money. All had tips,
and they wanted him to carry certain lines of stock on margin for them,
because he was known to other political men, and because he was safe.
And this was true. He was not, or at least up to this time had not been,
a speculator or a gambler on his own account. In fact he often soothed
himself with the thought that in all these years he had never gambled
for himself, but had always acted strictly for others instead. But now
here was George W. Stener with a proposition which was not quite the
same thing as stock-gambling, and yet it was.

During a long period of years preceding the Civil War, and through it,
let it here be explained and remembered, the city of Philadelphia had
been in the habit, as a corporation, when there were no available funds
in the treasury, of issuing what were known as city warrants, which were
nothing more than notes or I.O.U.'s bearing six per cent. interest, and
payable sometimes in thirty days, sometimes in three, sometimes in six
months--all depending on the amount and how soon the city treasurer
thought there would be sufficient money in the treasury to take them up
and cancel them. Small tradesmen and large contractors were frequently
paid in this way; the small tradesman who sold supplies to the city
institutions, for instance, being compelled to discount his notes at the
bank, if he needed ready money, usually for ninety cents on the dollar,
while the large contractor could afford to hold his and wait. It can
readily be seen that this might well work to the disadvantage of the
small dealer and merchant, and yet prove quite a fine thing for a large
contractor or note-broker, for the city was sure to pay the warrants at
some time, and six per cent. interest was a fat rate, considering the
absolute security. A banker or broker who gathered up these things from
small tradesmen at ninety cents on the dollar made a fine thing of it
all around if he could wait.

Originally, in all probability, there was no intention on the part of
the city treasurer to do any one an injustice, and it is likely that
there really were no funds to pay with at the time. However that may
have been, there was later no excuse for issuing the warrants, seeing
that the city might easily have been managed much more economically. But
these warrants, as can readily be imagined, had come to be a fine source
of profit for note-brokers, bankers, political financiers, and inside
political manipulators generally and so they remained a part of the
city's fiscal policy.

There was just one drawback to all this. In order to get the full
advantage of this condition the large banker holding them must be an
"inside banker," one close to the political forces of the city, for
if he was not and needed money and he carried his warrants to the city
treasurer, he would find that he could not get cash for them. But if
he transferred them to some banker or note-broker who was close to the
political force of the city, it was quite another matter. The treasury
would find means to pay. Or, if so desired by the note-broker or
banker--the right one--notes which were intended to be met in three
months, and should have been settled at that time, were extended to run
on years and years, drawing interest at six per cent. even when the
city had ample funds to meet them. Yet this meant, of course, an illegal
interest drain on the city, but that was all right also. "No funds"
could cover that. The general public did not know. It could not find
out. The newspapers were not at all vigilant, being pro-political. There
were no persistent, enthusiastic reformers who obtained any political
credence. During the war, warrants outstanding in this manner arose
in amount to much over two million dollars, all drawing six per cent.
interest, but then, of course, it began to get a little scandalous.
Besides, at least some of the investors began to want their money back.

In order, therefore, to clear up this outstanding indebtedness and make
everything shipshape again, it was decided that the city must issue a
loan, say for two million dollars--no need to be exact about the amount.
And this loan must take the shape of interest-bearing certificates of a
par value of one hundred dollars, redeemable in six, twelve, or eighteen
months, as the case may be. These certificates of loan were then
ostensibly to be sold in the open market, a sinking-fund set aside
for their redemption, and the money so obtained used to take up the
long-outstanding warrants which were now such a subject of public
comment.

It is obvious that this was merely a case of robbing Peter to pay
Paul. There was no real clearing up of the outstanding debt. It was
the intention of the schemers to make it possible for the financial
politicians on the inside to reap the same old harvest by allowing the
certificates to be sold to the right parties for ninety or less, setting
up the claim that there was no market for them, the credit of the city
being bad. To a certain extent this was true. The war was just over.
Money was high. Investors could get more than six per cent. elsewhere
unless the loan was sold at ninety. But there were a few watchful
politicians not in the administration, and some newspapers and
non-political financiers who, because of the high strain of patriotism
existing at the time, insisted that the loan should be sold at par.
Therefore a clause to that effect had to be inserted in the enabling
ordinance.

This, as one might readily see, destroyed the politicians' little scheme
to get this loan at ninety. Nevertheless since they desired that the
money tied up in the old warrants and now not redeemable because of lack
of funds should be paid them, the only way this could be done would be
to have some broker who knew the subtleties of the stock market handle
this new city loan on 'change in such a way that it would be made to
seem worth one hundred and to be sold to outsiders at that figure.
Afterward, if, as it was certain to do, it fell below that, the
politicians could buy as much of it as they pleased, and eventually have
the city redeem it at par.

George W. Stener, entering as city treasurer at this time, and bringing
no special financial intelligence to the proposition, was really
troubled. Henry A. Mollenhauer, one of the men who had gathered up a
large amount of the old city warrants, and who now wanted his money, in
order to invest it in bonanza offers in the West, called on Stener, and
also on the mayor. He with Simpson and Butler made up the Big Three.

"I think something ought to be done about these warrants that are
outstanding," he explained. "I am carrying a large amount of them, and
there are others. We have helped the city a long time by saying nothing;
but now I think that something ought to be done. Mr. Butler and Mr.
Simpson feel the same way. Couldn't these new loan certificates be
listed on the stock exchange and the money raised that way? Some clever
broker could bring them to par."

Stener was greatly flattered by the visit from Mollenhauer. Rarely did
he trouble to put in a personal appearance, and then only for the weight
and effect his presence would have. He called on the mayor and the
president of council, much as he called on Stener, with a lofty,
distant, inscrutable air. They were as office-boys to him.

In order to understand exactly the motive for Mollenhauer's interest
in Stener, and the significance of this visit and Stener's subsequent
action in regard to it, it will be necessary to scan the political
horizon for some little distance back. Although George W. Stener was in
a way a political henchman and appointee of Mollenhauer's, the latter
was only vaguely acquainted with him. He had seen him before; knew of
him; had agreed that his name should be put on the local slate largely
because he had been assured by those who were closest to him and who
did his bidding that Stener was "all right," that he would do as he
was told, that he would cause no one any trouble, etc. In fact,
during several previous administrations, Mollenhauer had maintained a
subsurface connection with the treasury, but never so close a one as
could easily be traced. He was too conspicuous a man politically and
financially for that. But he was not above a plan, in which Simpson if
not Butler shared, of using political and commercial stool-pigeons to
bleed the city treasury as much as possible without creating a scandal.
In fact, for some years previous to this, various agents had already
been employed--Edward Strobik, president of council, Asa Conklin, the
then incumbent of the mayor's chair, Thomas Wycroft, alderman, Jacob
Harmon, alderman, and others--to organize dummy companies under various
names, whose business it was to deal in those things which the city
needed--lumber, stone, steel, iron, cement--a long list--and of course,
always at a fat profit to those ultimately behind the dummy companies,
so organized. It saved the city the trouble of looking far and wide for
honest and reasonable dealers.

Since the action of at least three of these dummies will have something
to do with the development of Cowperwood's story, they may be briefly
described. Edward Strobik, the chief of them, and the one most useful to
Mollenhauer, in a minor way, was a very spry person of about thirty-five
at this time--lean and somewhat forceful, with black hair, black eyes,
and an inordinately large black mustache. He was dapper, inclined to
noticeable clothing--a pair of striped trousers, a white vest, a black
cutaway coat and a high silk hat. His markedly ornamental shoes were
always polished to perfection, and his immaculate appearance gave him
the nickname of "The Dude" among some. Nevertheless he was quite able on
a small scale, and was well liked by many.

His two closest associates, Messrs. Thomas Wycroft and Jacob Harmon,
were rather less attractive and less brilliant. Jacob Harmon was a thick
wit socially, but no fool financially. He was big and rather doleful to
look upon, with sandy brown hair and brown eyes, but fairly intelligent,
and absolutely willing to approve anything which was not too broad in
its crookedness and which would afford him sufficient protection to keep
him out of the clutches of the law. He was really not so cunning as dull
and anxious to get along.

Thomas Wycroft, the last of this useful but minor triumvirate, was a
tall, lean man, candle-waxy, hollow-eyed, gaunt of face, pathetic to
look at physically, but shrewd. He was an iron-molder by trade and had
gotten into politics much as Stener had--because he was useful; and he
had managed to make some money--via this triumvirate of which Strobik
was the ringleader, and which was engaged in various peculiar businesses
which will now be indicated.

The companies which these several henchmen had organized under previous
administrations, and for Mollenhauer, dealt in meat, building material,
lamp-posts, highway supplies, anything you will, which the city
departments or its institutions needed. A city contract once awarded was
irrevocable, but certain councilmen had to be fixed in advance and
it took money to do that. The company so organized need not actually
slaughter any cattle or mold lamp-posts. All it had to do was to
organize to do that, obtain a charter, secure a contract for supplying
such material to the city from the city council (which Strobik, Harmon,
and Wycroft would attend to), and then sublet this to some actual
beef-slaughterer or iron-founder, who would supply the material and
allow them to pocket their profit which in turn was divided or paid for
to Mollenhauer and Simpson in the form of political donations to
clubs or organizations. It was so easy and in a way so legitimate. The
particular beef-slaughterer or iron-founder thus favored could not hope
of his own ability thus to obtain a contract. Stener, or whoever was
in charge of the city treasury at the time, for his services in loaning
money at a low rate of interest to be used as surety for the proper
performance of contract, and to aid in some instances the beef-killer or
iron-founder to carry out his end, was to be allowed not only the one or
two per cent. which he might pocket (other treasurers had), but a fair
proportion of the profits. A complacent, confidential chief clerk who
was all right would be recommended to him. It did not concern Stener
that Strobik, Harmon, and Wycroft, acting for Mollenhauer, were
incidentally planning to use a little of the money loaned for purposes
quite outside those indicated. It was his business to loan it.

However, to be going on. Some time before he was even nominated, Stener
had learned from Strobik, who, by the way, was one of his sureties
as treasurer (which suretyship was against the law, as were those of
Councilmen Wycroft and Harmon, the law of Pennsylvania stipulating that
one political servant might not become surety for another), that those
who had brought about this nomination and election would by no means ask
him to do anything which was not perfectly legal, but that he must be
complacent and not stand in the way of big municipal perquisites nor
bite the hands that fed him. It was also made perfectly plain to him,
that once he was well in office a little money for himself was to be
made. As has been indicated, he had always been a poor man. He had seen
all those who had dabbled in politics to any extent about him heretofore
do very well financially indeed, while he pegged along as an insurance
and real-estate agent. He had worked hard as a small political henchman.
Other politicians were building themselves nice homes in newer portions
of the city. They were going off to New York or Harrisburg or Washington
on jaunting parties. They were seen in happy converse at road-houses or
country hotels in season with their wives or their women favorites,
and he was not, as yet, of this happy throng. Naturally now that he was
promised something, he was interested and compliant. What might he not
get?

When it came to this visit from Mollenhauer, with its suggestion
in regard to bringing city loan to par, although it bore no obvious
relation to Mollenhauer's subsurface connection with Stener, through
Strobik and the others, Stener did definitely recognize his own
political subservience--his master's stentorian voice--and immediately
thereafter hurried to Strobik for information.

"Just what would you do about this?" he asked of Strobik, who knew of
Mollenhauer's visit before Stener told him, and was waiting for Stener
to speak to him. "Mr. Mollenhauer talks about having this new loan
listed on 'change and brought to par so that it will sell for one
hundred."

Neither Strobik, Harmon, nor Wycroft knew how the certificates of city
loan, which were worth only ninety on the open market, were to be made
to sell for one hundred on 'change, but Mollenhauer's secretary, one
Abner Sengstack, had suggested to Strobik that, since Butler was dealing
with young Cowperwood and Mollenhauer did not care particularly for his
private broker in this instance, it might be as well to try Cowperwood.


So it was that Cowperwood was called to Stener's office. And once there,
and not as yet recognizing either the hand of Mollenhauer or Simpson
in this, merely looked at the peculiarly shambling, heavy-cheeked,
middle-class man before him without either interest or sympathy,
realizing at once that he had a financial baby to deal with. If he could
act as adviser to this man--be his sole counsel for four years!

"How do you do, Mr. Stener?" he said in his soft, ingratiating voice,
as the latter held out his hand. "I am glad to meet you. I have heard of
you before, of course."

Stener was long in explaining to Cowperwood just what his difficulty
was. He went at it in a clumsy fashion, stumbling through the
difficulties of the situation he was suffered to meet.

"The main thing, as I see it, is to make these certificates sell at par.
I can issue them in any sized lots you like, and as often as you like. I
want to get enough now to clear away two hundred thousand dollars' worth
of the outstanding warrants, and as much more as I can get later."

Cowperwood felt like a physician feeling a patient's pulse--a patient
who is really not sick at all but the reassurance of whom means a fat
fee. The abstrusities of the stock exchange were as his A B C's to him.
He knew if he could have this loan put in his hands--all of it, if he
could have the fact kept dark that he was acting for the city, and that
if Stener would allow him to buy as a "bull" for the sinking-fund while
selling judiciously for a rise, he could do wonders even with a big
issue. He had to have all of it, though, in order that he might have
agents under him. Looming up in his mind was a scheme whereby he could
make a lot of the unwary speculators about 'change go short of this
stock or loan under the impression, of course, that it was scattered
freely in various persons' hands, and that they could buy as much of it
as they wanted. Then they would wake to find that they could not get it;
that he had it all. Only he would not risk his secret that far. Not he,
oh, no. But he would drive the city loan to par and then sell. And
what a fat thing for himself among others in so doing. Wisely enough
he sensed that there was politics in all this--shrewder and bigger men
above and behind Stener. But what of that? And how slyly and shrewdly
they were sending Stener to him. It might be that his name was becoming
very potent in their political world here. And what might that not mean!

"I tell you what I'd like to do, Mr. Stener," he said, after he had
listened to his explanation and asked how much of the city loan he would
like to sell during the coming year. "I'll be glad to undertake it. But
I'd like to have a day or two in which to think it over."

"Why, certainly, certainly, Mr. Cowperwood," replied Stener, genially.
"That's all right. Take your time. If you know how it can be done, just
show me when you're ready. By the way, what do you charge?"

"Well, the stock exchange has a regular scale of charges which we
brokers are compelled to observe. It's one-fourth of one per cent. on
the par value of bonds and loans. Of course, I may hav to add a lot of
fictitious selling--I'll explain that to you later--but I won't charge
you anything for that so long as it is a secret between us. I'll give
you the best service I can, Mr. Stener. You can depend on that. Let me
have a day or two to think it over, though."

He shook hands with Stener, and they parted. Cowperwood was satisfied
that he was on the verge of a significant combination, and Stener that
he had found someone on whom he could lean.





Chapter XV


The plan Cowperwood developed after a few days' meditation will be
plain enough to any one who knows anything of commercial and financial
manipulation, but a dark secret to those who do not. In the first place,
the city treasurer was to use his (Cowperwood's) office as a bank of
deposit. He was to turn over to him, actually, or set over to his credit
on the city's books, subject to his order, certain amounts of city
loans--two hundred thousand dollars at first, since that was the amount
it was desired to raise quickly--and he would then go into the market
and see what could be done to have it brought to par. The city treasurer
was to ask leave of the stock exchange at once to have it listed as
a security. Cowperwood would then use his influence to have this
application acted upon quickly. Stener was then to dispose of all city
loan certificates through him, and him only. He was to allow him to buy
for the sinking-fund, supposedly, such amounts as he might have to buy
in order to keep the price up to par. To do this, once a considerable
number of the loan certificates had been unloaded on the public, it
might be necessary to buy back a great deal. However, these would be
sold again. The law concerning selling only at par would have to be
abrogated to this extent--i.e., that the wash sales and preliminary
sales would have to be considered no sales until par was reached.

There was a subtle advantage here, as Cowperwood pointed out to Stener.
In the first place, since the certificates were going ultimately to
reach par anyway, there was no objection to Stener or any one else
buying low at the opening price and holding for a rise. Cowperwood would
be glad to carry him on his books for any amount, and he would settle
at the end of each month. He would not be asked to buy the certificates
outright. He could be carried on the books for a certain reasonable
margin, say ten points. The money was as good as made for Stener now. In
the next place, in buying for the sinking-fund it would be possible to
buy these certificates very cheap, for, having the new and reserve issue
entirely in his hands, Cowperwood could throw such amounts as he wished
into the market at such times as he wished to buy, and consequently
depress the market. Then he could buy, and, later, up would go the
price. Having the issues totally in his hands to boost or depress
the market as he wished, there was no reason why the city should not
ultimately get par for all its issues, and at the same time considerable
money be made out of the manufactured fluctuations. He, Cowperwood,
would be glad to make most of his profit that way. The city should allow
him his normal percentage on all his actual sales of certificates for
the city at par (he would have to have that in order to keep straight
with the stock exchange); but beyond that, and for all the other
necessary manipulative sales, of which there would be many, he would
depend on his knowledge of the stock market to reimburse him. And if
Stener wanted to speculate with him--well.

Dark as this transaction may seem to the uninitiated, it will appear
quite clear to those who know. Manipulative tricks have always been
worked in connection with stocks of which one man or one set of men has
had complete control. It was no different from what subsequently was
done with Erie, Standard Oil, Copper, Sugar, Wheat, and what not.
Cowperwood was one of the first and one of the youngest to see how it
could be done. When he first talked to Stener he was twenty-eight years
of age. When he last did business with him he was thirty-four.

The houses and the bank-front of Cowperwood & Co. had been proceeding
apace. The latter was early Florentine in its decorations with windows
which grew narrower as they approached the roof, and a door of wrought
iron set between delicately carved posts, and a straight lintel of
brownstone. It was low in height and distinguished in appearance. In
the center panel had been hammered a hand, delicately wrought, thin and
artistic, holding aloft a flaming brand. Ellsworth informed him that
this had formerly been a money-changer's sign used in old Venice, the
significance of which had long been forgotten.

The interior was finished in highly-polished hardwood, stained in
imitation of the gray lichens which infest trees. Large sheets of clear,
beveled glass were used, some oval, some oblong, some square, and some
circular, following a given theory of eye movement. The fixtures for
the gas-jets were modeled after the early Roman flame-brackets, and the
office safe was made an ornament, raised on a marble platform at the
back of the office and lacquered a silver-gray, with Cowperwood & Co.
lettered on it in gold. One had a sense of reserve and taste pervading
the place, and yet it was also inestimably prosperous, solid and
assuring. Cowperwood, when he viewed it at its completion, complimented
Ellsworth cheerily. "I like this. It is really beautiful. It will be
a pleasure to work here. If those houses are going to be anything like
this, they will be perfect."

"Wait till you see them. I think you will be pleased, Mr. Cowperwood. I
am taking especial pains with yours because it is smaller. It is
really easier to treat your father's. But yours--" He went off into a
description of the entrance-hall, reception-room and parlor, which he
was arranging and decorating in such a way as to give an effect of size
and dignity not really conformable to the actual space.

And when the houses were finished, they were effective and
arresting--quite different from the conventional residences of the
street. They were separated by a space of twenty feet, laid out as
greensward. The architect had borrowed somewhat from the Tudor
school, yet not so elaborated as later became the style in many of the
residences in Philadelphia and elsewhere. The most striking features
were rather deep-recessed doorways under wide, low, slightly floriated
arches, and three projecting windows of rich form, one on the second
floor of Frank's house, two on the facade of his father's. There were
six gables showing on the front of the two houses, two on Frank's and
four on his father's. In the front of each house on the ground floor
was a recessed window unconnected with the recessed doorways, formed
by setting the inner external wall back from the outer face of the
building. This window looked out through an arched opening to the
street, and was protected by a dwarf parapet or balustrade. It was
possible to set potted vines and flowers there, which was later done,
giving a pleasant sense of greenery from the street, and to place a few
chairs there, which were reached via heavily barred French casements.

On the ground floor of each house was placed a conservatory of flowers,
facing each other, and in the yard, which was jointly used, a pool of
white marble eight feet in diameter, with a marble Cupid upon which jets
of water played. The yard which was enclosed by a high but pierced wall
of green-gray brick, especially burnt for the purpose the same color as
the granite of the house, and surmounted by a white marble coping which
was sown to grass and had a lovely, smooth, velvety appearance. The two
houses, as originally planned, were connected by a low, green-columned
pergola which could be enclosed in glass in winter.

The rooms, which were now slowly being decorated and furnished in period
styles were very significant in that they enlarged and strengthened
Frank Cowperwood's idea of the world of art in general. It was an
enlightening and agreeable experience--one which made for artistic and
intellectual growth--to hear Ellsworth explain at length the styles and
types of architecture and furniture, the nature of woods and ornaments
employed, the qualities and peculiarities of hangings, draperies,
furniture panels, and door coverings. Ellsworth was a student of
decoration as well as of architecture, and interested in the artistic
taste of the American people, which he fancied would some day have a
splendid outcome. He was wearied to death of the prevalent Romanesque
composite combinations of country and suburban villa. The time was ripe
for something new. He scarcely knew what it would be; but this that he
had designed for Cowperwood and his father was at least different, as
he said, while at the same time being reserved, simple, and pleasing.
It was in marked contrast to the rest of the architecture of the street.
Cowperwood's dining-room, reception-room, conservatory, and butler's
pantry he had put on the first floor, together with the general
entry-hall, staircase, and coat-room under the stairs. For the second
floor he had reserved the library, general living-room, parlor, and
a small office for Cowperwood, together with a boudoir for Lillian,
connected with a dressing-room and bath.

On the third floor, neatly divided and accommodated with baths and
dressing-rooms, were the nursery, the servants' quarters, and several
guest-chambers.

Ellsworth showed Cowperwood books of designs containing furniture,
hangings, etageres, cabinets, pedestals, and some exquisite piano forms.
He discussed woods with him--rosewood, mahogany, walnut, English
oak, bird's-eye maple, and the manufactured effects such as ormolu,
marquetry, and Boule, or buhl. He explained the latter--how difficult it
was to produce, how unsuitable it was in some respects for this climate,
the brass and tortoise-shell inlay coming to swell with the heat or
damp, and so bulging or breaking. He told of the difficulties and
disadvantages of certain finishes, but finally recommended ormolu
furniture for the reception room, medallion tapestry for the parlor,
French renaissance for the dining-room and library, and bird's-eye maple
(dyed blue in one instance, and left its natural color in another) and
a rather lightly constructed and daintily carved walnut for the
other rooms. The hangings, wall-paper, and floor coverings were to
harmonize--not match--and the piano and music-cabinet for the parlor,
as well as the etagere, cabinets, and pedestals for the reception-rooms,
were to be of buhl or marquetry, if Frank cared to stand the expense.

Ellsworth advised a triangular piano--the square shapes were so
inexpressibly wearisome to the initiated. Cowperwood listened
fascinated. He foresaw a home which would be chaste, soothing, and
delightful to look upon. If he hung pictures, gilt frames were to be the
setting, large and deep; and if he wished a picture-gallery, the library
could be converted into that, and the general living-room, which lay
between the library and the parlor on the second-floor, could be turned
into a combination library and living-room. This was eventually done;
but not until his taste for pictures had considerably advanced.

It was now that he began to take a keen interest in objects of art,
pictures, bronzes, little carvings and figurines, for his cabinets,
pedestals, tables, and etageres. Philadelphia did not offer much that
was distinguished in this realm--certainly not in the open market.
There were many private houses which were enriched by travel; but his
connection with the best families was as yet small. There were then
two famous American sculptors, Powers and Hosmer, of whose work he had
examples; but Ellsworth told him that they were not the last word in
sculpture and that he should look into the merits of the ancients. He
finally secured a head of David, by Thorwaldsen, which delighted him,
and some landscapes by Hunt, Sully, and Hart, which seemed somewhat in
the spirit of his new world.

The effect of a house of this character on its owner is unmistakable.
We think we are individual, separate, above houses and material objects
generally; but there is a subtle connection which makes them reflect us
quite as much as we reflect them. They lend dignity, subtlety, force,
each to the other, and what beauty, or lack of it, there is, is shot
back and forth from one to the other as a shuttle in a loom, weaving,
weaving. Cut the thread, separate a man from that which is rightfully
his own, characteristic of him, and you have a peculiar figure, half
success, half failure, much as a spider without its web, which will
never be its whole self again until all its dignities and emoluments are
restored.

The sight of his new house going up made Cowperwood feel of more weight
in the world, and the possession of his suddenly achieved connection
with the city treasurer was as though a wide door had been thrown open
to the Elysian fields of opportunity. He rode about the city those days
behind a team of spirited bays, whose glossy hides and metaled harness
bespoke the watchful care of hostler and coachman. Ellsworth was
building an attractive stable in the little side street back of the
houses, for the joint use of both families. He told Mrs. Cowperwood that
he intended to buy her a victoria--as the low, open, four-wheeled coach
was then known--as soon as they were well settled in their new home, and
that they were to go out more. There was some talk about the value
of entertaining--that he would have to reach out socially for certain
individuals who were not now known to him. Together with Anna, his
sister, and his two brothers, Joseph and Edward, they could use the two
houses jointly. There was no reason why Anna should not make a splendid
match. Joe and Ed might marry well, since they were not destined to set
the world on fire in commerce. At least it would not hurt them to try.

"Don't you think you will like that?" he asked his wife, referring to
his plans for entertaining.

She smiled wanly. "I suppose so," she said.





Chapter XVI


It was not long after the arrangement between Treasurer Stener and
Cowperwood had been made that the machinery for the carrying out of
that political-financial relationship was put in motion. The sum of
two hundred and ten thousand dollars in six per cent. interest-bearing
certificates, payable in ten years, was set over to the credit of
Cowperwood & Co. on the books of the city, subject to his order. Then,
with proper listing, he began to offer it in small amounts at more than
ninety, at the same time creating the impression that it was going to
be a prosperous investment. The certificates gradually rose and were
unloaded in rising amounts until one hundred was reached, when all
the two hundred thousand dollars' worth--two thousand certificates in
all--was fed out in small lots. Stener was satisfied. Two hundred shares
had been carried for him and sold at one hundred, which netted him
two thousand dollars. It was illegitimate gain, unethical; but his
conscience was not very much troubled by that. He had none, truly. He
saw visions of a halcyon future.

It is difficult to make perfectly clear what a subtle and significant
power this suddenly placed in the hands of Cowperwood. Consider that he
was only twenty-eight--nearing twenty-nine. Imagine yourself by nature
versed in the arts of finance, capable of playing with sums of money in
the forms of stocks, certificates, bonds, and cash, as the ordinary man
plays with checkers or chess. Or, better yet, imagine yourself one of
those subtle masters of the mysteries of the higher forms of
chess--the type of mind so well illustrated by the famous and historic
chess-players, who could sit with their backs to a group of rivals
playing fourteen men at once, calling out all the moves in turn,
remembering all the positions of all the men on all the boards, and
winning. This, of course, would be an overstatement of the subtlety of
Cowperwood at this time, and yet it would not be wholly out of bounds.
He knew instinctively what could be done with a given sum of money--how
as cash it could be deposited in one place, and yet as credit and the
basis of moving checks, used in not one but many other places at the
same time. When properly watched and followed this manipulation gave him
the constructive and purchasing power of ten and a dozen times as much
as his original sum might have represented. He knew instinctively the
principles of "pyramiding" and "kiting." He could see exactly not only
how he could raise and lower the value of these certificates of loan,
day after day and year after year--if he were so fortunate as to retain
his hold on the city treasurer--but also how this would give him a
credit with the banks hitherto beyond his wildest dreams. His father's
bank was one of the first to profit by this and to extend him loans. The
various local politicians and bosses--Mollenhauer, Butler, Simpson, and
others--seeing the success of his efforts in this direction, speculated
in city loan. He became known to Mollenhauer and Simpson, by reputation,
if not personally, as the man who was carrying this city loan
proposition to a successful issue. Stener was supposed to have done
a clever thing in finding him. The stock exchange stipulated that all
trades were to be compared the same day and settled before the close of
the next; but this working arrangement with the new city treasurer gave
Cowperwood much more latitude, and now he had always until the first of
the month, or practically thirty days at times, in which to render an
accounting for all deals connected with the loan issue.

And, moreover, this was really not an accounting in the sense of
removing anything from his hands. Since the issue was to be so large,
the sum at his disposal would always be large, and so-called transfers
and balancing at the end of the month would be a mere matter of
bookkeeping. He could use these city loan certificates deposited with
him for manipulative purposes, deposit them at any bank as collateral
for a loan, quite as if they were his own, thus raising seventy per
cent. of their actual value in cash, and he did not hesitate to do so.
He could take this cash, which need not be accounted for until the end
of the month, and cover other stock transactions, on which he could
borrow again. There was no limit to the resources of which he now found
himself possessed, except the resources of his own energy, ingenuity,
and the limits of time in which he had to work. The politicians did not
realize what a bonanza he was making of it all for himself, because they
were as yet unaware of the subtlety of his mind. When Stener told him,
after talking the matter over with the mayor, Strobik, and others that
he would formally, during the course of the year, set over on the city's
books all of the two millions in city loan, Cowperwood was silent--but
with delight. Two millions! His to play with! He had been called in as
a financial adviser, and he had given his advice and it had been taken!
Well. He was not a man who inherently was troubled with conscientious
scruples. At the same time he still believed himself financially honest.
He was no sharper or shrewder than any other financier--certainly no
sharper than any other would be if he could.

It should be noted here that this proposition of Stener's in regard to
city money had no connection with the attitude of the principal leaders
in local politics in regard to street-railway control, which was a new
and intriguing phase of the city's financial life. Many of the leading
financiers and financier-politicians were interested in that. For
instance, Messrs. Mollenhauer, Butler, and Simpson were interested
in street-railways separately on their own account. There was no
understanding between them on this score. If they had thought at all on
the matter they would have decided that they did not want any outsider
to interfere. As a matter of fact the street-railway business in
Philadelphia was not sufficiently developed at this time to suggest to
any one the grand scheme of union which came later. Yet in connection
with this new arrangement between Stener and Cowperwood, it was Strobik
who now came forward to Stener with an idea of his own. All were certain
to make money through Cowperwood--he and Stener, especially. What
was amiss, therefore, with himself and Stener and with Cowperwood as
their--or rather Stener's secret representative, since Strobik did
not dare to appear in the matter--buying now sufficient street-railway
shares in some one line to control it, and then, if he, Strobik, could,
by efforts of his own, get the city council to set aside certain streets
for its extension, why, there you were--they would own it. Only, later,
he proposed to shake Stener out if he could. But this preliminary work
had to be done by some one, and it might as well be Stener. At the
same time, as he saw, this work had to be done very carefully, because
naturally his superiors were watchful, and if they found him dabbling in
affairs of this kind to his own advantage, they might make it impossible
for him to continue politically in a position where he could help
himself just the same. Any outside organization such as a street-railway
company already in existence had a right to appeal to the city council
for privileges which would naturally further its and the city's growth,
and, other things being equal, these could not be refused. It would not
do for him to appear, however, both as a shareholder and president of
the council. But with Cowperwood acting privately for Stener it would be
another thing.

The interesting thing about this proposition as finally presented by
Stener for Strobik to Cowperwood, was that it raised, without appearing
to do so, the whole question of Cowperwood's attitude toward the city
administration. Although he was dealing privately for Edward Butler as
an agent, and with this same plan in mind, and although he had never met
either Mollenhauer or Simpson, he nevertheless felt that in so far as
the manipulation of the city loan was concerned he was acting for them.
On the other hand, in this matter of the private street-railway purchase
which Stener now brought to him, he realized from the very beginning, by
Stener's attitude, that there was something untoward in it, that Stener
felt he was doing something which he ought not to do.

"Cowperwood," he said to him the first morning he ever broached this
matter--it was in Stener's office, at the old city hall at Sixth and
Chestnut, and Stener, in view of his oncoming prosperity, was feeling
very good indeed--"isn't there some street-railway property around town
here that a man could buy in on and get control of if he had sufficient
money?"

Cowperwood knew that there were such properties. His very alert mind
had long since sensed the general opportunities here. The omnibuses
were slowly disappearing. The best routes were already preempted.
Still, there were other streets, and the city was growing. The incoming
population would make great business in the future. One could afford to
pay almost any price for the short lines already built if one could wait
and extend the lines into larger and better areas later. And already
he had conceived in his own mind the theory of the "endless chain,"
or "argeeable formula," as it was later termed, of buying a certain
property on a long-time payment and issuing stocks or bonds sufficient
not only to pay your seller, but to reimburse you for your trouble,
to say nothing of giving you a margin wherewith to invest in other
things--allied properties, for instance, against which more bonds could
be issued, and so on, ad infinitum. It became an old story later, but it
was new at that time, and he kept the thought closely to himself. None
the less he was glad to have Stener speak of this, since street-railways
were his hobby, and he was convinced that he would be a great master of
them if he ever had an opportunity to control them.

"Why, yes, George," he said, noncommittally, "there are two or three that
offer a good chance if a man had money enough. I notice blocks of stock
being offered on 'change now and then by one person and another. It
would be good policy to pick these things up as they're offered, and
then to see later if some of the other stockholders won't want to sell
out. Green and Coates, now, looks like a good proposition to me. If I
had three or four hundred thousand dollars that I thought I could put
into that by degrees I would follow it up. It only takes about thirty
per cent. of the stock of any railroad to control it. Most of the shares
are scattered around so far and wide that they never vote, and I think
two or three hundred thousand dollars would control that road." He
mentioned one other line that might be secured in the same way in the
course of time.

Stener meditated. "That's a good deal of money," he said, thoughtfully.
"I'll talk to you about that some more later." And he was off to see
Strobik none the less.

Cowperwood knew that Stener did not have any two or three hundred
thousand dollars to invest in anything. There was only one way that he
could get it--and that was to borrow it out of the city treasury and
forego the interest. But he would not do that on his own initiative.
Some one else must be behind him and who else other than Mollenhauer,
or Simpson, or possibly even Butler, though he doubted that, unless the
triumvirate were secretly working together. But what of it? The larger
politicians were always using the treasury, and he was thinking now,
only, of his own attitude in regard to the use of this money. No harm
could come to him, if Stener's ventures were successful; and there was
no reason why they should not be. Even if they were not he would be
merely acting as an agent. In addition, he saw how in the manipulation
of this money for Stener he could probably eventually control certain
lines for himself.

There was one line being laid out to within a few blocks of his new
home--the Seventeenth and Nineteenth Street line it was called--which
interested him greatly. He rode on it occasionally when he was delayed
or did not wish to trouble about a vehicle. It ran through two thriving
streets of red-brick houses, and was destined to have a great future
once the city grew large enough. As yet it was really not long enough.
If he could get that, for instance, and combine it with Butler's lines,
once they were secured--or Mollenhauer's, or Simpson's, the legislature
could be induced to give them additional franchises. He even dreamed of
a combination between Butler, Mollenhauer, Simpson, and himself.
Between them, politically, they could get anything. But Butler was not a
philanthropist. He would have to be approached with a very sizable bird
in hand. The combination must be obviously advisable. Besides, he was
dealing for Butler in street-railway stocks, and if this particular line
were such a good thing Butler might wonder why it had not been brought
to him in the first place. It would be better, Frank thought, to
wait until he actually had it as his own, in which case it would be a
different matter. Then he could talk as a capitalist. He began to
dream of a city-wide street-railway system controlled by a few men, or
preferably himself alone.





Chapter XVII


The days that had been passing brought Frank Cowperwood and Aileen
Butler somewhat closer together in spirit. Because of the pressure of
his growing affairs he had not paid so much attention to her as he might
have, but he had seen her often this past year. She was now nineteen and
had grown into some subtle thoughts of her own. For one thing, she was
beginning to see the difference between good taste and bad taste in
houses and furnishings.

"Papa, why do we stay in this old barn?" she asked her father one
evening at dinner, when the usual family group was seated at the table.

"What's the matter with this house, I'd like to know?" demanded Butler,
who was drawn up close to the table, his napkin tucked comfortably under
his chin, for he insisted on this when company was not present. "I don't
see anything the matter with this house. Your mother and I manage to
live in it well enough."

"Oh, it's terrible, papa. You know it," supplemented Norah, who was
seventeen and quite as bright as her sister, though a little less
experienced. "Everybody says so. Look at all the nice houses that are
being built everywhere about here."

"Everybody! Everybody! Who is 'everybody,' I'd like to know?" demanded
Butler, with the faintest touch of choler and much humor. "I'm somebody,
and I like it. Those that don't like it don't have to live in it. Who
are they? What's the matter with it, I'd like to know?"

The question in just this form had been up a number of times before,
and had been handled in just this manner, or passed over entirely with a
healthy Irish grin. To-night, however, it was destined for a little more
extended thought.

"You know it's bad, papa," corrected Aileen, firmly. "Now what's the use
getting mad about it? It's old and cheap and dingy. The furniture is all
worn out. That old piano in there ought to be given away. I won't play
on it any more. The Cowperwoods--"

"Old is it!" exclaimed Butler, his accent sharpening somewhat with his
self-induced rage. He almost pronounced it "owled." "Dingy, hi! Where do
you get that? At your convent, I suppose. And where is it worn? Show me
where it's worn."

He was coming to her reference to Cowperwood, but he hadn't reached
that when Mrs. Butler interfered. She was a stout, broad-faced woman,
smiling-mouthed most of the time, with blurry, gray Irish eyes, and a
touch of red in her hair, now modified by grayness. Her cheek, below the
mouth, on the left side, was sharply accented by a large wen.

"Children! children!" (Mr. Butler, for all his commercial and political
responsibility, was as much a child to her as any.) "Youse mustn't
quarrel now. Come now. Give your father the tomatoes."

There was an Irish maid serving at table; but plates were passed from
one to the other just the same. A heavily ornamented chandelier, holding
sixteen imitation candles in white porcelain, hung low over the table
and was brightly lighted, another offense to Aileen.

"Mama, how often have I told you not to say 'youse'?" pleaded Norah,
very much disheartened by her mother's grammatical errors. "You know you
said you wouldn't."

"And who's to tell your mother what she should say?" called Butler, more
incensed than ever at this sudden and unwarranted rebellion and assault.
"Your mother talked before ever you was born, I'd have you know. If it
weren't for her workin' and slavin' you wouldn't have any fine manners
to be paradin' before her. I'd have you know that. She's a better woman
nor any you'll be runnin' with this day, you little baggage, you!"

"Mama, do you hear what he's calling me?" complained Norah, hugging
close to her mother's arm and pretending fear and dissatisfaction.

"Eddie! Eddie!" cautioned Mrs. Butler, pleading with her husband. "You
know he don't mean that, Norah, dear. Don't you know he don't?"

She was stroking her baby's head. The reference to her grammar had not
touched her at all.

Butler was sorry that he had called his youngest a baggage; but these
children--God bless his soul--were a great annoyance. Why, in the name
of all the saints, wasn't this house good enough for them?

"Why don't you people quit fussing at the table?" observed Callum, a
likely youth, with black hair laid smoothly over his forehead in a long,
distinguished layer reaching from his left to close to his right ear,
and his upper lip carrying a short, crisp mustache. His nose was short
and retrousse, and his ears were rather prominent; but he was bright and
attractive. He and Owen both realized that the house was old and poorly
arranged; but their father and mother liked it, and business sense and
family peace dictated silence on this score.

"Well, I think it's mean to have to live in this old place when
people not one-fourth as good as we are are living in better ones. The
Cowperwoods--why, even the Cowperwoods--"

"Yes, the Cowperwoods! What about the Cowperwoods?" demanded Butler,
turning squarely to Aileen--she was sitting beside him---his big, red
face glowing.

"Why, even they have a better house than we have, and he's merely an
agent of yours."

"The Cowperwoods! The Cowperwoods! I'll not have any talk about the
Cowperwoods. I'm not takin' my rules from the Cowperwoods. Suppose they
have a fine house, what of it? My house is my house. I want to live
here. I've lived here too long to be pickin' up and movin' away. If you
don't like it you know what else you can do. Move if you want to. I'll
not move."

It was Butler's habit when he became involved in these family
quarrels, which were as shallow as puddles, to wave his hands rather
antagonistically under his wife's or his children's noses.

"Oh, well, I will get out one of these days," Aileen replied. "Thank
heaven I won't have to live here forever."

There flashed across her mind the beautiful reception-room, library,
parlor, and boudoirs of the Cowperwoods, which were now being arranged
and about which Anna Cowperwood talked to her so much--their dainty,
lovely triangular grand piano in gold and painted pink and blue. Why
couldn't they have things like that? Her father was unquestionably a
dozen times as wealthy. But no, her father, whom she loved dearly, was
of the old school. He was just what people charged him with being, a
rough Irish contractor. He might be rich. She flared up at the injustice
of things--why couldn't he have been rich and refined, too? Then they
could have--but, oh, what was the use of complaining? They would never
get anywhere with her father and mother in charge. She would just have
to wait. Marriage was the answer--the right marriage. But whom was she
to marry?

"You surely are not going to go on fighting about that now," pleaded
Mrs. Butler, as strong and patient as fate itself. She knew where
Aileen's trouble lay.

"But we might have a decent house," insisted Aileen. "Or this one done
over," whispered Norah to her mother.

"Hush now! In good time," replied Mrs. Butler to Norah. "Wait. We'll
fix it all up some day, sure. You run to your lessons now. You've had
enough."

Norah arose and left. Aileen subsided. Her father was simply stubborn
and impossible. And yet he was sweet, too. She pouted in order to compel
him to apologize.

"Come now," he said, after they had left the table, and conscious of the
fact that his daughter was dissatisfied with him. He must do something
to placate her. "Play me somethin' on the piano, somethin' nice." He
preferred showy, clattery things which exhibited her skill and muscular
ability and left him wondering how she did it. That was what education
was for--to enable her to play these very difficult things quickly and
forcefully. "And you can have a new piano any time you like. Go and see
about it. This looks pretty good to me, but if you don't want it, all
right." Aileen squeezed his arm. What was the use of arguing with her
father? What good would a lone piano do, when the whole house and
the whole family atmosphere were at fault? But she played Schumann,
Schubert, Offenbach, Chopin, and the old gentleman strolled to and
fro and mused, smiling. There was real feeling and a thoughtful
interpretation given to some of these things, for Aileen was not without
sentiment, though she was so strong, vigorous, and withal so defiant;
but it was all lost on him. He looked on her, his bright, healthy,
enticingly beautiful daughter, and wondered what was going to become of
her. Some rich man was going to many her--some fine, rich young man with
good business instincts--and he, her father, would leave her a lot of
money.

There was a reception and a dance to be given to celebrate the
opening of the two Cowperwood homes--the reception to be held in Frank
Cowperwood's residence, and the dance later at his father's. The Henry
Cowperwood domicile was much more pretentious, the reception-room,
parlor, music-room, and conservatory being in this case all on the
ground floor and much larger. Ellsworth had arranged it so that those
rooms, on occasion, could be thrown into one, leaving excellent space
for promenade, auditorium, dancing--anything, in fact, that a large
company might require. It had been the intention all along of the two
men to use these houses jointly. There was, to begin with, a combination
use of the various servants, the butler, gardener, laundress, and maids.
Frank Cowperwood employed a governess for his children. The butler was
really not a butler in the best sense. He was Henry Cowperwood's private
servitor. But he could carve and preside, and he could be used in either
house as occasion warranted. There was also a hostler and a coachman for
the joint stable. When two carriages were required at once, both drove.
It made a very agreeable and satisfactory working arrangement.

The preparation of this reception had been quite a matter of importance,
for it was necessary for financial reasons to make it as extensive as
possible, and for social reasons as exclusive. It was therefore decided
that the afternoon reception at Frank's house, with its natural overflow
into Henry W.'s, was to be for all--the Tighes, Steners, Butlers,
Mollenhauers, as well as the more select groups to which, for instance,
belonged Arthur Rivers, Mrs. Seneca Davis, Mr. and Mrs. Trenor Drake,
and some of the younger Drexels and Clarks, whom Frank had met. It was
not likely that the latter would condescend, but cards had to be sent.
Later in the evening a less democratic group if possible was to be
entertained, albeit it would have to be extended to include the friends
of Anna, Mrs. Cowperwood, Edward, and Joseph, and any list which Frank
might personally have in mind. This was to be the list. The best that
could be persuaded, commanded, or influenced of the young and socially
elect were to be invited here.

It was not possible, however, not to invite the Butlers, parents and
children, particularly the children, for both afternoon and evening,
since Cowperwood was personally attracted to Aileen and despite the
fact that the presence of the parents would be most unsatisfactory. Even
Aileen as he knew was a little unsatisfactory to Anna and Mrs. Frank
Cowperwood; and these two, when they were together supervising the list
of invitations, often talked about it.

"She's so hoidenish," observed Anna, to her sister-in-law, when they
came to the name of Aileen. "She thinks she knows so much, and she isn't
a bit refined. Her father! Well, if I had her father I wouldn't talk so
smart."

Mrs. Cowperwood, who was before her secretaire in her new boudoir,
lifted her eyebrows.

"You know, Anna, I sometimes wish that Frank's business did not compel
me to have anything to do with them. Mrs. Butler is such a bore. She
means well enough, but she doesn't know anything. And Aileen is too
rough. She's too forward, I think. She comes over here and plays upon
the piano, particularly when Frank's here. I wouldn't mind so much for
myself, but I know it must annoy him. All her pieces are so noisy. She
never plays anything really delicate and refined."

"I don't like the way she dresses," observed Anna, sympathetically.
"She gets herself up too conspicuously. Now, the other day I saw her out
driving, and oh, dear! you should have seen her! She had on a crimson
Zouave jacket heavily braided with black about the edges, and a turban
with a huge crimson feather, and crimson ribbons reaching nearly to her
waist. Imagine that kind of a hat to drive in. And her hands! You should
have seen the way she held her hands--oh--just so--self-consciously.
They were curved just so"--and she showed how. "She had on yellow
gauntlets, and she held the reins in one hand and the whip in the other.
She drives just like mad when she drives, anyhow, and William, the
footman, was up behind her. You should just have seen her. Oh, dear!
oh, dear! she does think she is so much!" And Anna giggled, half in
reproach, half in amusement.

"I suppose we'll have to invite her; I don't see how we can get out of
it. I know just how she'll do, though. She'll walk about and pose and
hold her nose up."

"Really, I don't see how she can," commented Anna. "Now, I like Norah.
She's much nicer. She doesn't think she's so much."

"I like Norah, too," added Mrs. Cowperwood. "She's really very sweet,
and to me she's prettier."

"Oh, indeed, I think so, too."

It was curious, though, that it was Aileen who commanded nearly all
their attention and fixed their minds on her so-called idiosyncrasies.
All they said was in its peculiar way true; but in addition the girl was
really beautiful and much above the average intelligence and force. She
was running deep with ambition, and she was all the more conspicuous,
and in a way irritating to some, because she reflected in her own
consciousness her social defects, against which she was inwardly
fighting. She resented the fact that people could justly consider her
parents ineligible, and for that reason her also. She was intrinsically
as worth while as any one. Cowperwood, so able, and rapidly becoming so
distinguished, seemed to realize it. The days that had been passing had
brought them somewhat closer together in spirit. He was nice to her and
liked to talk to her. Whenever he was at her home now, or she was at his
and he was present, he managed somehow to say a word. He would come over
quite near and look at her in a warm friendly fashion.

"Well, Aileen"--she could see his genial eyes--"how is it with you? How
are your father and mother? Been out driving? That's fine. I saw you
to-day. You looked beautiful."

"Oh, Mr. Cowperwood!"

"You did. You looked stunning. A black riding-habit becomes you. I can
tell your gold hair a long way off."

"Oh, now, you mustn't say that to me. You'll make me vain. My mother and
father tell me I'm too vain as it is."

"Never mind your mother and father. I say you looked stunning, and you
did. You always do."

"Oh!"

She gave a little gasp of delight. The color mounted to her cheeks and
temples. Mr. Cowperwood knew of course. He was so informed and intensely
forceful. And already he was so much admired by so many, her own father
and mother included, and by Mr. Mollenhauer and Mr. Simpson, so she
heard. And his own home and office were so beautiful. Besides, his quiet
intensity matched her restless force.

Aileen and her sister were accordingly invited to the reception but the
Butlers mere and pere were given to understand, in as tactful a manner
as possible, that the dance afterward was principally for young people.

The reception brought a throng of people. There were many, very many,
introductions. There were tactful descriptions of little effects Mr.
Ellsworth had achieved under rather trying circumstances; walks under
the pergola; viewings of both homes in detail. Many of the guests were
old friends. They gathered in the libraries and dining-rooms and
talked. There was much jesting, some slappings of shoulders, some good
story-telling, and so the afternoon waned into evening, and they went
away.

Aileen had created an impression in a street costume of dark blue silk
with velvet pelisse to match, and trimmed with elaborate pleatings and
shirrings of the same materials. A toque of blue velvet, with high crown
and one large dark-red imitation orchid, had given her a jaunty, dashing
air. Beneath the toque her red-gold hair was arranged in an enormous
chignon, with one long curl escaping over her collar. She was not
exactly as daring as she seemed, but she loved to give that impression.

"You look wonderful," Cowperwood said as she passed him.

"I'll look different to-night," was her answer.

She had swung herself with a slight, swaggering stride into the
dining-room and disappeared. Norah and her mother stayed to chat with
Mrs. Cowperwood.

"Well, it's lovely now, isn't it?" breathed Mrs. Butler. "Sure you'll be
happy here. Sure you will. When Eddie fixed the house we're in now, says
I: 'Eddie, it's almost too fine for us altogether--surely it is,' and he
says, says 'e, 'Norah, nothin' this side o' heavin or beyond is too
good for ye'--and he kissed me. Now what d'ye think of that fer a big,
hulkin' gossoon?"

"It's perfectly lovely, I think, Mrs. Butler," commented Mrs.
Cowperwood, a little bit nervous because of others.

"Mama does love to talk so. Come on, mama. Let's look at the
dining-room." It was Norah talking.

"Well, may ye always be happy in it. I wish ye that. I've always been
happy in mine. May ye always be happy." And she waddled good-naturedly
along.

The Cowperwood family dined hastily alone between seven and eight. At
nine the evening guests began to arrive, and now the throng was of a
different complexion--girls in mauve and cream-white and salmon-pink and
silver-gray, laying aside lace shawls and loose dolmans, and the men in
smooth black helping them. Outside in the cold, the carriage doors were
slamming, and new guests were arriving constantly. Mrs. Cowperwood stood
with her husband and Anna in the main entrance to the reception room,
while Joseph and Edward Cowperwood and Mr. and Mrs. Henry W. Cowperwood
lingered in the background. Lillian looked charming in a train gown of
old rose, with a low, square neck showing a delicate chemisette of fine
lace. Her face and figure were still notable, though her face was not as
smoothly sweet as it had been years before when Cowperwood had first met
her. Anna Cowperwood was not pretty, though she could not be said to be
homely. She was small and dark, with a turned-up nose, snapping black
eyes, a pert, inquisitive, intelligent, and alas, somewhat critical,
air. She had considerable tact in the matter of dressing. Black, in
spite of her darkness, with shining beads of sequins on it, helped her
complexion greatly, as did a red rose in her hair. She had smooth, white
well-rounded arms and shoulders. Bright eyes, a pert manner, clever
remarks--these assisted to create an illusion of charm, though, as she
often said, it was of little use. "Men want the dolly things."

In the evening inpour of young men and women came Aileen and Norah, the
former throwing off a thin net veil of black lace and a dolman of black
silk, which her brother Owen took from her. Norah was with Callum, a
straight, erect, smiling young Irishman, who looked as though he might
carve a notable career for himself. She wore a short, girlish dress that
came to a little below her shoe-tops, a pale-figured lavender and white
silk, with a fluffy hoop-skirt of dainty laced-edged ruffles, against
which tiny bows of lavender stood out in odd places. There was a great
sash of lavender about her waist, and in her hair a rosette of the same
color. She looked exceedingly winsome--eager and bright-eyed.

But behind her was her sister in ravishing black satin, scaled as a fish
with glistening crimsoned-silver sequins, her round, smooth arms bare
to the shoulders, her corsage cut as low in the front and back as her
daring, in relation to her sense of the proprieties, permitted. She was
naturally of exquisite figure, erect, full-breasted, with somewhat more
than gently swelling hips, which, nevertheless, melted into lovely,
harmonious lines; and this low-cut corsage, receding back and front into
a deep V, above a short, gracefully draped overskirt of black tulle
and silver tissue, set her off to perfection. Her full, smooth, roundly
modeled neck was enhanced in its cream-pink whiteness by an inch-wide
necklet of black jet cut in many faceted black squares. Her complexion,
naturally high in tone because of the pink of health, was enhanced by
the tiniest speck of black court-plaster laid upon her cheekbone; and
her hair, heightened in its reddish-gold by her dress, was fluffed
loosely and adroitly about her eyes. The main mass of this treasure was
done in two loose braids caught up in a black spangled net at the back
of her neck; and her eyebrows had been emphasized by a pencil into
something almost as significant as her hair. She was, for the occasion,
a little too emphatic, perhaps, and yet more because of her burning
vitality than of her costume. Art for her should have meant subduing
her physical and spiritual significance. Life for her meant emphasizing
them.

"Lillian!" Anna nudged her sister-in-law. She was grieved to think that
Aileen was wearing black and looked so much better than either of them.

"I see," Lillian replied, in a subdued tone.

"So you're back again." She was addressing Aileen. "It's chilly out,
isn't it?"

"I don't mind. Don't the rooms look lovely?"

She was gazing at the softly lighted chambers and the throng before her.

Norah began to babble to Anna. "You know, I just thought I never would
get this old thing on." She was speaking of her dress. "Aileen wouldn't
help me--the mean thing!"

Aileen had swept on to Cowperwood and his mother, who was near him. She
had removed from her arm the black satin ribbon which held her train and
kicked the skirts loose and free. Her eyes gleamed almost pleadingly
for all her hauteur, like a spirited collie's, and her even teeth showed
beautifully.

Cowperwood understood her precisely, as he did any fine, spirited
animal.

"I can't tell you how nice you look," he whispered to her, familiarly,
as though there was an old understanding between them. "You're like fire
and song."

He did not know why he said this. He was not especially poetic. He had
not formulated the phrase beforehand. Since his first glimpse of her
in the hall, his feelings and ideas had been leaping and plunging like
spirited horses. This girl made him set his teeth and narrow his eyes.
Involuntarily he squared his jaw, looking more defiant, forceful,
efficient, as she drew near.

But Aileen and her sister were almost instantly surrounded by young men
seeking to be introduced and to write their names on dance-cards, and
for the time being she was lost to view.





Chapter XVIII


The seeds of change--subtle, metaphysical--are rooted deeply. From the
first mention of the dance by Mrs. Cowperwood and Anna, Aileen had been
conscious of a desire toward a more effective presentation of herself
than as yet, for all her father's money, she had been able to achieve.
The company which she was to encounter, as she well knew, was to be so
much more impressive, distinguished than anything she had heretofore
known socially. Then, too, Cowperwood appeared as something more
definite in her mind than he had been before, and to save herself she
could not get him out of her consciousness.

A vision of him had come to her but an hour before as she was dressing.
In a way she had dressed for him. She was never forgetful of the times
he had looked at her in an interested way. He had commented on her hands
once. To-day he had said that she looked "stunning," and she had thought
how easy it would be to impress him to-night--to show him how truly
beautiful she was.

She had stood before her mirror between eight and nine--it was
nine-fifteen before she was really ready--and pondered over what she
should wear. There were two tall pier-glasses in her wardrobe--an unduly
large piece of furniture--and one in her closet door. She stood before
the latter, looking at her bare arms and shoulders, her shapely figure,
thinking of the fact that her left shoulder had a dimple, and that she
had selected garnet garters decorated with heart-shaped silver buckles.
The corset could not be made quite tight enough at first, and she chided
her maid, Kathleen Kelly. She studied how to arrange her hair, and there
was much ado about that before it was finally adjusted. She penciled her
eyebrows and plucked at the hair about her forehead to make it loose
and shadowy. She cut black court-plaster with her nail-shears and tried
different-sized pieces in different places. Finally, she found one size
and one place that suited her. She turned her head from side to side,
looking at the combined effect of her hair, her penciled brows, her
dimpled shoulder, and the black beauty-spot. If some one man could see
her as she was now, some time! Which man? That thought scurried back
like a frightened rat into its hole. She was, for all her strength,
afraid of the thought of the one--the very deadly--the man.

And then she came to the matter of a train-gown. Kathleen laid out five,
for Aileen had come into the joy and honor of these things recently, and
she had, with the permission of her mother and father, indulged
herself to the full. She studied a golden-yellow silk, with cream-lace
shoulder-straps, and some gussets of garnet beads in the train that
shimmered delightfully, but set it aside. She considered favorably a
black-and-white striped silk of odd gray effect, and, though she was
sorely tempted to wear it, finally let it go. There was a maroon dress,
with basque and overskirt over white silk; a rich cream-colored satin;
and then this black sequined gown, which she finally chose. She tried
on the cream-colored satin first, however, being in much doubt about it;
but her penciled eyes and beauty-spot did not seem to harmonize with
it. Then she put on the black silk with its glistening crimsoned-silver
sequins, and, lo, it touched her. She liked its coquettish drapery of
tulle and silver about the hips. The "overskirt," which was at that time
just coming into fashion, though avoided by the more conservative, had
been adopted by Aileen with enthusiasm. She thrilled a little at the
rustle of this black dress, and thrust her chin and nose forward to make
it set right. Then after having Kathleen tighten her corsets a little
more, she gathered the train over her arm by its train-band and looked
again. Something was wanting. Oh, yes, her neck! What to wear--red
coral? It did not look right. A string of pearls? That would not do
either. There was a necklace made of small cameos set in silver which
her mother had purchased, and another of diamonds which belonged to her
mother, but they were not right. Finally, her jet necklet, which she
did not value very highly, came into her mind, and, oh, how lovely it
looked! How soft and smooth and glistening her chin looked above it. She
caressed her neck affectionately, called for her black lace mantilla,
her long, black silk dolman lined with red, and she was ready.

The ball-room, as she entered, was lovely enough. The young men and
young women she saw there were interesting, and she was not wanting
for admirers. The most aggressive of these youths--the most
forceful--recognized in this maiden a fillip to life, a sting to
existence. She was as a honey-jar surrounded by too hungry flies.

But it occurred to her, as her dance-list was filling up, that there was
not much left for Mr. Cowperwood, if he should care to dance with her.

Cowperwood was meditating, as he received the last of the guests, on the
subtlety of this matter of the sex arrangement of life. Two sexes. He
was not at all sure that there was any law governing them. By comparison
now with Aileen Butler, his wife looked rather dull, quite too old, and
when he was ten years older she would look very much older.

"Oh, yes, Ellsworth had made quite an attractive arrangement out of
these two houses--better than we ever thought he could do." He was
talking to Henry Hale Sanderson, a young banker. "He had the advantage
of combining two into one, and I think he's done more with my little
one, considering the limitations of space, than he has with this big
one. Father's has the advantage of size. I tell the old gentleman he's
simply built a lean-to for me."

His father and a number of his cronies were over in the dining-room of
his grand home, glad to get away from the crowd. He would have to stay,
and, besides, he wanted to. Had he better dance with Aileen? His wife
cared little for dancing, but he would have to dance with her at least
once. There was Mrs. Seneca Davis smiling at him, and Aileen. By George,
how wonderful! What a girl!

"I suppose your dance-list is full to overflowing. Let me see." He was
standing before her and she was holding out the little blue-bordered,
gold-monogrammed booklet. An orchestra was playing in the music room.
The dance would begin shortly. There were delicately constructed,
gold-tinted chairs about the walls and behind palms.

He looked down into her eyes--those excited, life-loving, eager eyes.

"You're quite full up. Let me see. Nine, ten, eleven. Well, that will be
enough. I don't suppose I shall want to dance very much. It's nice to be
popular."

"I'm not sure about number three. I think that's a mistake. You might
have that if you wish."

She was falsifying.

"It doesn't matter so much about him, does it?"

His cheeks flushed a little as he said this.

"No."

Her own flamed.

"Well, I'll see where you are when it's called. You're darling. I'm
afraid of you." He shot a level, interpretive glance into her eyes, then
left. Aileen's bosom heaved. It was hard to breathe sometimes in this
warm air.

While he was dancing first with Mrs. Cowperwood and later with Mrs.
Seneca Davis, and still later with Mrs. Martyn Walker, Cowperwood had
occasion to look at Aileen often, and each time that he did so there
swept over him a sense of great vigor there, of beautiful if raw,
dynamic energy that to him was irresistible and especially so to-night.
She was so young. She was beautiful, this girl, and in spite of his
wife's repeated derogatory comments he felt that she was nearer to his
clear, aggressive, unblinking attitude than any one whom he had yet seen
in the form of woman. She was unsophisticated, in a way, that was plain,
and yet in another way it would take so little to make her understand so
much. Largeness was the sense he had of her--not physically, though she
was nearly as tall as himself--but emotionally. She seemed so intensely
alive. She passed close to him a number of times, her eyes wide and
smiling, her lips parted, her teeth agleam, and he felt a stirring
of sympathy and companionship for her which he had not previously
experienced. She was lovely, all of her--delightful.

"I'm wondering if that dance is open now," he said to her as he drew
near toward the beginning of the third set. She was seated with her
latest admirer in a far corner of the general living-room, a clear floor
now waxed to perfection. A few palms here and there made embrasured
parapets of green. "I hope you'll excuse me," he added, deferentially,
to her companion.

"Surely," the latter replied, rising.

"Yes, indeed," she replied. "And you'd better stay here with me. It's
going to begin soon. You won't mind?" she added, giving her companion a
radiant smile.

"Not at all. I've had a lovely waltz." He strolled off.

Cowperwood sat down. "That's young Ledoux, isn't it? I thought so. I saw
you dancing. You like it, don't you?"

"I'm crazy about it."

"Well, I can't say that myself. It's fascinating, though. Your partner
makes such a difference. Mrs. Cowperwood doesn't like it as much as I
do."

His mention of Lillian made Aileen think of her in a faintly derogative
way for a moment.

"I think you dance very well. I watched you, too." She questioned
afterwards whether she should have said this. It sounded most forward
now--almost brazen.

"Oh, did you?"

"Yes."

He was a little keyed up because of her--slightly cloudy in his
thoughts--because she was generating a problem in his life, or would
if he let her, and so his talk was a little tame. He was thinking of
something to say--some words which would bring them a little nearer
together. But for the moment he could not. Truth to tell, he wanted to
say a great deal.

"Well, that was nice of you," he added, after a moment. "What made you
do it?"

He turned with a mock air of inquiry. The music was beginning again. The
dancers were rising. He arose.

He had not intended to give this particular remark a serious turn; but,
now that she was so near him, he looked into her eyes steadily but with
a soft appeal and said, "Yes, why?"

They had come out from behind the palms. He had put his hand to her
waist. His right arm held her left extended arm to arm, palm to palm.
Her right hand was on his shoulder, and she was close to him, looking
into his eyes. As they began the gay undulations of the waltz she looked
away and then down without answering. Her movements were as light
and airy as those of a butterfly. He felt a sudden lightness himself,
communicated as by an invisible current. He wanted to match the
suppleness of her body with his own, and did. Her arms, the flash and
glint of the crimson sequins against the smooth, black silk of her
closely fitting dress, her neck, her glowing, radiant hair, all combined
to provoke a slight intellectual intoxication. She was so vigorously
young, so, to him, truly beautiful.

"But you didn't answer," he continued.

"Isn't this lovely music?"

He pressed her fingers.

She lifted shy eyes to him now, for, in spite of her gay, aggressive
force, she was afraid of him. His personality was obviously so
dominating. Now that he was so close to her, dancing, she conceived
of him as something quite wonderful, and yet she experienced a nervous
reaction--a momentary desire to run away.

"Very well, if you won't tell me," he smiled, mockingly.

He thought she wanted him to talk to her so, to tease her with
suggestions of this concealed feeling of his--this strong liking. He
wondered what could come of any such understanding as this, anyhow?

"Oh, I just wanted to see how you danced," she said, tamely, the force
of her original feeling having been weakened by a thought of what she
was doing. He noted the change and smiled. It was lovely to be dancing
with her. He had not thought mere dancing could hold such charm.

"You like me?" he said, suddenly, as the music drew to its close.

She thrilled from head to toe at the question. A piece of ice dropped
down her back could not have startled her more. It was apparently
tactless, and yet it was anything but tactless. She looked up quickly,
directly, but his strong eyes were too much for her.

"Why, yes," she answered, as the music stopped, trying to keep an even
tone to her voice. She was glad they were walking toward a chair.

"I like you so much," he said, "that I have been wondering if you really
like me." There was an appeal in his voice, soft and gentle. His manner
was almost sad.

"Why, yes," she replied, instantly, returning to her earlier mood toward
him. "You know I do."

"I need some one like you to like me," he continued, in the same vein.
"I need some one like you to talk to. I didn't think so before--but now
I do. You are beautiful--wonderful."

"We mustn't," she said. "I mustn't. I don't know what I'm doing."
She looked at a young man strolling toward her, and asked: "I have to
explain to him. He's the one I had this dance with."

Cowperwood understood. He walked away. He was quite warm and tense
now--almost nervous. It was quite clear to him that he had done or was
contemplating perhaps a very treacherous thing. Under the current code
of society he had no right to do it. It was against the rules, as
they were understood by everybody. Her father, for instance--his
father--every one in this particular walk of life. However, much
breaking of the rules under the surface of things there might be, the
rules were still there. As he had heard one young man remark once at
school, when some story had been told of a boy leading a girl astray and
to a disastrous end, "That isn't the way at all."

Still, now that he had said this, strong thoughts of her were in his
mind. And despite his involved social and financial position, which he
now recalled, it was interesting to him to see how deliberately and even
calculatingly--and worse, enthusiastically--he was pumping the bellows
that tended only to heighten the flames of his desire for this girl; to
feed a fire that might ultimately consume him--and how deliberately and
resourcefully!

Aileen toyed aimlessly with her fan as a black-haired, thin-faced young
law student talked to her, and seeing Norah in the distance she asked to
be allowed to run over to her.

"Oh, Aileen," called Norah, "I've been looking for you everywhere. Where
have you been?"

"Dancing, of course. Where do you suppose I've been? Didn't you see me
on the floor?"

"No, I didn't," complained Norah, as though it were most essential that
she should. "How late are you going to stay?"

"Until it's over, I suppose. I don't know."

"Owen says he's going at twelve."

"Well, that doesn't matter. Some one will take me home. Are you having a
good time?"

"Fine. Oh, let me tell you. I stepped on a lady's dress over there, last
dance. She was terribly angry. She gave me such a look."

"Well, never mind, honey. She won't hurt you. Where are you going now?"

Aileen always maintained a most guardian-like attitude toward her
sister.

"I want to find Callum. He has to dance with me next time. I know what
he's trying to do. He's trying to get away from me. But he won't."

Aileen smiled. Norah looked very sweet. And she was so bright. What
would she think of her if she knew? She turned back, and her fourth
partner sought her. She began talking gayly, for she felt that she had
to make a show of composure; but all the while there was ringing in her
ears that definite question of his, "You like me, don't you?" and her
later uncertain but not less truthful answer, "Yes, of course I do."





Chapter XIX


The growth of a passion is a very peculiar thing. In highly organized
intellectual and artistic types it is so often apt to begin with
keen appreciation of certain qualities, modified by many, many mental
reservations. The egoist, the intellectual, gives but little of himself
and asks much. Nevertheless, the lover of life, male or female, finding
himself or herself in sympathetic accord with such a nature, is apt to
gain much.

Cowperwood was innately and primarily an egoist and intellectual, though
blended strongly therewith, was a humane and democratic spirit. We think
of egoism and intellectualism as closely confined to the arts. Finance
is an art. And it presents the operations of the subtlest of the
intellectuals and of the egoists. Cowperwood was a financier. Instead
of dwelling on the works of nature, its beauty and subtlety, to his
material disadvantage, he found a happy mean, owing to the swiftness
of his intellectual operations, whereby he could, intellectually and
emotionally, rejoice in the beauty of life without interfering with his
perpetual material and financial calculations. And when it came to women
and morals, which involved so much relating to beauty, happiness, a
sense of distinction and variety in living, he was but now beginning
to suspect for himself at least that apart from maintaining organized
society in its present form there was no basis for this one-life,
one-love idea. How had it come about that so many people agreed on this
single point, that it was good and necessary to marry one woman and
cleave to her until death? He did not know. It was not for him to bother
about the subtleties of evolution, which even then was being noised
abroad, or to ferret out the curiosities of history in connection with
this matter. He had no time. Suffice it that the vagaries of temperament
and conditions with which he came into immediate contact proved to him
that there was great dissatisfaction with that idea. People did not
cleave to each other until death; and in thousands of cases where
they did, they did not want to. Quickness of mind, subtlety of idea,
fortuitousness of opportunity, made it possible for some people to right
their matrimonial and social infelicities; whereas for others, because
of dullness of wit, thickness of comprehension, poverty, and lack of
charm, there was no escape from the slough of their despond. They
were compelled by some devilish accident of birth or lack of force
or resourcefulness to stew in their own juice of wretchedness, or to
shuffle off this mortal coil--which under other circumstances had such
glittering possibilities--via the rope, the knife, the bullet, or the
cup of poison.

"I would die, too," he thought to himself, one day, reading of a man
who, confined by disease and poverty, had lived for twelve years alone
in a back bedroom attended by an old and probably decrepit housekeeper.
A darning-needle forced into his heart had ended his earthly woes. "To
the devil with such a life! Why twelve years? Why not at the end of the
second or third?"

Again, it was so very evident, in so many ways, that force was the
answer--great mental and physical force. Why, these giants of commerce
and money could do as they pleased in this life, and did. He had already
had ample local evidence of it in more than one direction. Worse--the
little guardians of so-called law and morality, the newspapers, the
preachers, the police, and the public moralists generally, so loud in
their denunciation of evil in humble places, were cowards all when it
came to corruption in high ones. They did not dare to utter a feeble
squeak until some giant had accidentally fallen and they could do
so without danger to themselves. Then, O Heavens, the palaver!
What beatings of tom-toms! What mouthings of pharisaical
moralities--platitudes! Run now, good people, for you may see clearly
how evil is dealt with in high places! It made him smile. Such
hypocrisy! Such cant! Still, so the world was organized, and it was not
for him to set it right. Let it wag as it would. The thing for him to
do was to get rich and hold his own--to build up a seeming of virtue and
dignity which would pass muster for the genuine thing. Force would do
that. Quickness of wit. And he had these. "I satisfy myself," was his
motto; and it might well have been emblazoned upon any coat of arms
which he could have contrived to set forth his claim to intellectual and
social nobility.

But this matter of Aileen was up for consideration and solution at this
present moment, and because of his forceful, determined character he
was presently not at all disturbed by the problem it presented. It was
a problem, like some of those knotty financial complications which
presented themselves daily; but it was not insoluble. What did he want
to do? He couldn't leave his wife and fly with Aileen, that was certain.
He had too many connections. He had too many social, and thinking of his
children and parents, emotional as well as financial ties to bind him.
Besides, he was not at all sure that he wanted to. He did not intend to
leave his growing interests, and at the same time he did not intend to
give up Aileen immediately. The unheralded manifestation of interest
on her part was too attractive. Mrs. Cowperwood was no longer what
she should be physically and mentally, and that in itself to him was
sufficient to justify his present interest in this girl. Why fear
anything, if only he could figure out a way to achieve it without harm
to himself? At the same time he thought it might never be possible for
him to figure out any practical or protective program for either himself
or Aileen, and that made him silent and reflective. For by now he was
intensely drawn to her, as he could feel--something chemic and hence
dynamic was uppermost in him now and clamoring for expression.

At the same time, in contemplating his wife in connection with all
this, he had many qualms, some emotional, some financial. While she had
yielded to his youthful enthusiasm for her after her husband's death,
he had only since learned that she was a natural conservator of public
morals--the cold purity of the snowdrift in so far as the world might
see, combined at times with the murky mood of the wanton. And yet, as he
had also learned, she was ashamed of the passion that at times swept and
dominated her. This irritated Cowperwood, as it would always irritate
any strong, acquisitive, direct-seeing temperament. While he had no
desire to acquaint the whole world with his feelings, why should there
be concealment between them, or at least mental evasion of a fact which
physically she subscribed to? Why do one thing and think another? To be
sure, she was devoted to him in her quiet way, not passionately (as
he looked back he could not say that she had ever been that), but
intellectually. Duty, as she understood it, played a great part in this.
She was dutiful. And then what people thought, what the time-spirit
demanded--these were the great things. Aileen, on the contrary, was
probably not dutiful, and it was obvious that she had no temperamental
connection with current convention. No doubt she had been as well
instructed as many another girl, but look at her. She was not obeying
her instructions.

In the next three months this relationship took on a more flagrant form.
Aileen, knowing full well what her parents would think, how unspeakable
in the mind of the current world were the thoughts she was thinking,
persisted, nevertheless, in so thinking and longing. Cowperwood, now
that she had gone thus far and compromised herself in intention, if not
in deed, took on a peculiar charm for her. It was not his body--great
passion is never that, exactly. The flavor of his spirit was what
attracted and compelled, like the glow of a flame to a moth. There was
a light of romance in his eyes, which, however governed and
controlled--was directive and almost all-powerful to her.

When he touched her hand at parting, it was as though she had received
an electric shock, and she recalled that it was very difficult for her
to look directly into his eyes. Something akin to a destructive force
seemed to issue from them at times. Other people, men particularly,
found it difficult to face Cowperwood's glazed stare. It was as though
there were another pair of eyes behind those they saw, watching through
thin, obscuring curtains. You could not tell what he was thinking.

And during the next few months she found herself coming closer and
closer to Cowperwood. At his home one evening, seated at the piano, no
one else being present at the moment, he leaned over and kissed her.
There was a cold, snowy street visible through the interstices of the
hangings of the windows, and gas-lamps flickering outside. He had come
in early, and hearing Aileen, he came to where she was seated at the
piano. She was wearing a rough, gray wool cloth dress, ornately banded
with fringed Oriental embroidery in blue and burnt-orange, and her
beauty was further enhanced by a gray hat planned to match her dress,
with a plume of shaded orange and blue. On her fingers were four or
five rings, far too many--an opal, an emerald, a ruby, and a
diamond--flashing visibly as she played.

She knew it was he, without turning. He came beside her, and she looked
up smiling, the reverie evoked by Schubert partly vanishing--or melting
into another mood. Suddenly he bent over and pressed his lips firmly
to hers. His mustache thrilled her with its silky touch. She stopped
playing and tried to catch her breath, for, strong as she was, it
affected her breathing. Her heart was beating like a triphammer. She did
not say, "Oh," or, "You mustn't," but rose and walked over to a window,
where she lifted a curtain, pretending to look out. She felt as though
she might faint, so intensely happy was she.

Cowperwood followed her quickly. Slipping his arms about her waist, he
looked at her flushed cheeks, her clear, moist eyes and red mouth.

"You love me?" he whispered, stern and compelling because of his desire.

"Yes! Yes! You know I do."

He crushed her face to his, and she put up her hands and stroked his
hair.

A thrilling sense of possession, mastery, happiness and understanding,
love of her and of her body, suddenly overwhelmed him.

"I love you," he said, as though he were surprised to hear himself say
it. "I didn't think I did, but I do. You're beautiful. I'm wild about
you."

"And I love you" she answered. "I can't help it. I know I shouldn't,
but--oh--" Her hands closed tight over his ears and temples. She put her
lips to his and dreamed into his eyes. Then she stepped away quickly,
looking out into the street, and he walked back into the living-room.
They were quite alone. He was debating whether he should risk anything
further when Norah, having been in to see Anna next door, appeared and
not long afterward Mrs. Cowperwood. Then Aileen and Norah left.





Chapter XX


This definite and final understanding having been reached, it was
but natural that this liaison should proceed to a closer and closer
relationship. Despite her religious upbringing, Aileen was decidedly a
victim of her temperament. Current religious feeling and belief could
not control her. For the past nine or ten years there had been slowly
forming in her mind a notion of what her lover should be like. He should
be strong, handsome, direct, successful, with clear eyes, a ruddy glow
of health, and a certain native understanding and sympathy--a love of
life which matched her own. Many young men had approached her. Perhaps
the nearest realization of her ideal was Father David, of St. Timothy's,
and he was, of course, a priest and sworn to celibacy. No word had ever
passed between them but he had been as conscious of her as she of him.
Then came Frank Cowperwood, and by degrees, because of his presence and
contact, he had been slowly built up in her mind as the ideal person.
She was drawn as planets are drawn to their sun.

It is a question as to what would have happened if antagonistic forces
could have been introduced just at this time. Emotions and liaisons of
this character can, of course, occasionally be broken up and destroyed.
The characters of the individuals can be modified or changed to a
certain extent, but the force must be quite sufficient. Fear is a great
deterrent--fear of material loss where there is no spiritual dread--but
wealth and position so often tend to destroy this dread. It is so easy
to scheme with means. Aileen had no spiritual dread whatever. Cowperwood
was without spiritual or religious feeling. He looked at this girl,
and his one thought was how could he so deceive the world that he could
enjoy her love and leave his present state undisturbed. Love her he did
surely.

Business necessitated his calling at the Butlers' quite frequently, and
on each occasion he saw Aileen. She managed to slip forward and squeeze
his hand the first time he came--to steal a quick, vivid kiss; and
another time, as he was going out, she suddenly appeared from behind the
curtains hanging at the parlor door.

"Honey!"

The voice was soft and coaxing. He turned, giving her a warning nod in
the direction of her father's room upstairs.

She stood there, holding out one hand, and he stepped forward for a
second. Instantly her arms were about his neck, as he slipped his about
her waist.

"I long to see you so."

"I, too. I'll fix some way. I'm thinking."

He released her arms, and went out, and she ran to the window and looked
out after him. He was walking west on the street, for his house was only
a few blocks away, and she looked at the breadth of his shoulders, the
balance of his form. He stepped so briskly, so incisively. Ah, this was
a man! He was her Frank. She thought of him in that light already. Then
she sat down at the piano and played pensively until dinner.

And it was so easy for the resourceful mind of Frank Cowperwood, wealthy
as he was, to suggest ways and means. In his younger gallivantings about
places of ill repute, and his subsequent occasional variations from the
straight and narrow path, he had learned much of the curious resources
of immorality. Being a city of five hundred thousand and more at this
time, Philadelphia had its nondescript hotels, where one might go,
cautiously and fairly protected from observation; and there were houses
of a conservative, residential character, where appointments might be
made, for a consideration. And as for safeguards against the production
of new life--they were not mysteries to him any longer. He knew all
about them. Care was the point of caution. He had to be cautious, for
he was so rapidly coming to be an influential and a distinguished man.
Aileen, of course, was not conscious, except in a vague way, of the
drift of her passion; the ultimate destiny to which this affection might
lead was not clear to her. Her craving was for love--to be fondled and
caressed--and she really did not think so much further. Further thoughts
along this line were like rats that showed their heads out of dark holes
in shadowy corners and scuttled back at the least sound. And, anyhow,
all that was to be connected with Cowperwood would be beautiful. She
really did not think that he loved her yet as he should; but he would.
She did not know that she wanted to interfere with the claims of his
wife. She did not think she did. But it would not hurt Mrs. Cowperwood
if Frank loved her--Aileen--also.

How shall we explain these subtleties of temperament and desire? Life
has to deal with them at every turn. They will not down, and the large,
placid movements of nature outside of man's little organisms would
indicate that she is not greatly concerned. We see much punishment in
the form of jails, diseases, failures, and wrecks; but we also see that
the old tendency is not visibly lessened. Is there no law outside of the
subtle will and power of the individual to achieve? If not, it is surely
high time that we knew it--one and all. We might then agree to do as we
do; but there would be no silly illusion as to divine regulation. Vox
populi, vox Dei.

So there were other meetings, lovely hours which they soon began to
spend the moment her passion waxed warm enough to assure compliance,
without great fear and without thought of the deadly risk involved. From
odd moments in his own home, stolen when there was no one about to see,
they advanced to clandestine meetings beyond the confines of the city.
Cowperwood was not one who was temperamentally inclined to lose his head
and neglect his business. As a matter of fact, the more he thought of
this rather unexpected affectional development, the more certain he was
that he must not let it interfere with his business time and judgment.
His office required his full attention from nine until three, anyhow. He
could give it until five-thirty with profit; but he could take several
afternoons off, from three-thirty until five-thirty or six, and no one
would be the wiser. It was customary for Aileen to drive alone almost
every afternoon a spirited pair of bays, or to ride a mount, bought
by her father for her from a noted horse-dealer in Baltimore. Since
Cowperwood also drove and rode, it was not difficult to arrange
meeting-places far out on the Wissahickon or the Schuylkill road. There
were many spots in the newly laid-out park, which were as free from
interruption as the depths of a forest. It was always possible that
they might encounter some one; but it was also always possible to make a
rather plausible explanation, or none at all, since even in case of such
an encounter nothing, ordinarily, would be suspected.

So, for the time being there was love-making, the usual billing and
cooing of lovers in a simple and much less than final fashion; and the
lovely horseback rides together under the green trees of the approaching
spring were idyllic. Cowperwood awakened to a sense of joy in life such
as he fancied, in the blush of this new desire, he had never experienced
before. Lillian had been lovely in those early days in which he had
first called on her in North Front Street, and he had fancied himself
unspeakably happy at that time; but that was nearly ten years since,
and he had forgotten. Since then he had had no great passion, no notable
liaison; and then, all at once, in the midst of his new, great business
prosperity, Aileen. Her young body and soul, her passionate illusions.
He could see always, for all her daring, that she knew so little of the
calculating, brutal world with which he was connected. Her father had
given her all the toys she wanted without stint; her mother and brothers
had coddled her, particularly her mother. Her young sister thought she
was adorable. No one imagined for one moment that Aileen would ever do
anything wrong. She was too sensible, after all, too eager to get up
in the world. Why should she, when her life lay open and happy before
her--a delightful love-match, some day soon, with some very eligible and
satisfactory lover?

"When you marry, Aileen," her mother used to say to her, "we'll have a
grand time here. Sure we'll do the house over then, if we don't do it
before. Eddie will have to fix it up, or I'll do it meself. Never fear."

"Yes--well, I'd rather you'd fix it now," was her reply.

Butler himself used to strike her jovially on the shoulder in a rough,
loving way, and ask, "Well, have you found him yet?" or "Is he hanging
around the outside watchin' for ye?"

If she said, "No," he would reply: "Well, he will be, never fear--worse
luck. I'll hate to see ye go, girlie! You can stay here as long as ye
want to, and ye want to remember that you can always come back."

Aileen paid very little attention to this bantering. She loved her
father, but it was all such a matter of course. It was the commonplace
of her existence, and not so very significant, though delightful enough.

But how eagerly she yielded herself to Cowperwood under the spring trees
these days! She had no sense of that ultimate yielding that was coming,
for now he merely caressed and talked to her. He was a little doubtful
about himself. His growing liberties for himself seemed natural enough,
but in a sense of fairness to her he began to talk to her about what
their love might involve. Would she? Did she understand? This phase of
it puzzled and frightened Aileen a little at first. She stood before him
one afternoon in her black riding-habit and high silk riding-hat perched
jauntily on her red-gold hair; and striking her riding-skirt with her
short whip, pondering doubtfully as she listened. He had asked her
whether she knew what she was doing? Whither they were drifting? If
she loved him truly enough? The two horses were tethered in a thicket a
score of yards away from the main road and from the bank of a tumbling
stream, which they had approached. She was trying to discover if she
could see them. It was pretense. There was no interest in her glance.
She was thinking of him and the smartness of his habit, and the
exquisiteness of this moment. He had such a charming calico pony. The
leaves were just enough developed to make a diaphanous lacework of
green. It was like looking through a green-spangled arras to peer into
the woods beyond or behind. The gray stones were already faintly
messy where the water rippled and sparkled, and early birds were
calling--robins and blackbirds and wrens.

"Baby mine," he said, "do you understand all about this? Do you know
exactly what you're doing when you come with me this way?"

"I think I do."

She struck her boot and looked at the ground, and then up through the
trees at the blue sky.

"Look at me, honey."

"I don't want to."

"But look at me, sweet. I want to ask you something."

"Don't make me, Frank, please. I can't."

"Oh yes, you can look at me."

"No."

She backed away as he took her hands, but came forward again, easily
enough.

"Now look in my eyes."

"I can't."

"See here."

"I can't. Don't ask me. I'll answer you, but don't make me look at you."

His hand stole to her cheek and fondled it. He petted her shoulder, and
she leaned her head against him.

"Sweet, you're so beautiful," he said finally, "I can't give you up. I
know what I ought to do. You know, too, I suppose; but I can't. I must
have you. If this should end in exposure, it would be quite bad for you
and me. Do you understand?"

"Yes."

"I don't know your brothers very well; but from looking at them I judge
they're pretty determined people. They think a great deal of you."

"Indeed, they do." Her vanity prinked slightly at this.

"They would probably want to kill me, and very promptly, for just this
much. What do you think they would want to do if--well, if anything
should happen, some time?"

He waited, watching her pretty face.

"But nothing need happen. We needn't go any further."

"Aileen!"

"I won't look at you. You needn't ask. I can't."

"Aileen! Do you mean that?"

"I don't know. Don't ask me, Frank."

"You know it can't stop this way, don't you? You know it. This isn't
the end. Now, if--" He explained the whole theory of illicit meetings,
calmly, dispassionately. "You are perfectly safe, except for one thing,
chance exposure. It might just so happen; and then, of course, there
would be a great deal to settle for. Mrs. Cowperwood would never give me
a divorce; she has no reason to. If I should clean up in the way I hope
to--if I should make a million--I wouldn't mind knocking off now. I
don't expect to work all my days. I have always planned to knock off at
thirty-five. I'll have enough by that time. Then I want to travel. It
will only be a few more years now. If you were free--if your father
and mother were dead"--curiously she did not wince at this practical
reference--"it would be a different matter."

He paused. She still gazed thoughtfully at the water below, her mind
running out to a yacht on the sea with him, a palace somewhere--just
they two. Her eyes, half closed, saw this happy world; and, listening to
him, she was fascinated.

"Hanged if I see the way out of this, exactly. But I love you!" He
caught her to him. "I love you--love you!"

"Oh, yes," she replied intensely, "I want you to. I'm not afraid."

"I've taken a house in North Tenth Street," he said finally, as they
walked over to the horses and mounted them. "It isn't furnished yet; but
it will be soon. I know a woman who will take charge."

"Who is she?"

"An interesting widow of nearly fifty. Very intelligent--she is
attractive, and knows a good deal of life. I found her through an
advertisement. You might call on her some afternoon when things are
arranged, and look the place over. You needn't meet her except in a
casual way. Will you?"

She rode on, thinking, making no reply. He was so direct and practical
in his calculations.

"Will you? It will be all right. You might know her. She isn't
objectionable in any way. Will you?"

"Let me know when it is ready," was all she said finally.





Chapter XXI


The vagaries of passion! Subtleties! Risks! What sacrifices are not
laid willfully upon its altar! In a little while this more than average
residence to which Cowperwood had referred was prepared solely to
effect a satisfactory method of concealment. The house was governed by
a seemingly recently-bereaved widow, and it was possible for Aileen to
call without seeming strangely out of place. In such surroundings, and
under such circumstances, it was not difficult to persuade her to
give herself wholly to her lover, governed as she was by her wild and
unreasoning affection and passion. In a way, there was a saving element
of love, for truly, above all others, she wanted this man. She had no
thought or feeling toward any other. All her mind ran toward visions of
the future, when, somehow, she and he might be together for all time.
Mrs. Cowperwood might die, or he might run away with her at thirty-five
when he had a million. Some adjustment would be made, somehow. Nature
had given her this man. She relied on him implicitly. When he told her
that he would take care of her so that nothing evil should befall, she
believed him fully. Such sins are the commonplaces of the confessional.

It is a curious fact that by some subtlety of logic in the Christian
world, it has come to be believed that there can be no love outside the
conventional process of courtship and marriage. One life, one love, is
the Christian idea, and into this sluice or mold it has been endeavoring
to compress the whole world. Pagan thought held no such belief. A
writing of divorce for trivial causes was the theory of the elders; and
in the primeval world nature apparently holds no scheme for the unity of
two beyond the temporary care of the young. That the modern home is
the most beautiful of schemes, when based upon mutual sympathy and
understanding between two, need not be questioned. And yet this fact
should not necessarily carry with it a condemnation of all love not so
fortunate as to find so happy a denouement. Life cannot be put into
any mold, and the attempt might as well be abandoned at once. Those
so fortunate as to find harmonious companionship for life should
congratulate themselves and strive to be worthy of it. Those not
so blessed, though they be written down as pariahs, have yet some
justification. And, besides, whether we will or not, theory or no
theory, the basic facts of chemistry and physics remain. Like is drawn
to like. Changes in temperament bring changes in relationship. Dogma may
bind some minds; fear, others. But there are always those in whom the
chemistry and physics of life are large, and in whom neither dogma nor
fear is operative. Society lifts its hands in horror; but from age
to age the Helens, the Messalinas, the Du Barrys, the Pompadours, the
Maintenons, and the Nell Gwyns flourish and point a freer basis of
relationship than we have yet been able to square with our lives.

These two felt unutterably bound to each other. Cowperwood, once he came
to understand her, fancied that he had found the one person with whom he
could live happily the rest of his life. She was so young, so confident,
so hopeful, so undismayed. All these months since they had first begun
to reach out to each other he had been hourly contrasting her with his
wife. As a matter of fact, his dissatisfaction, though it may be said to
have been faint up to this time, was now surely tending to become real
enough. Still, his children were pleasing to him; his home beautiful.
Lillian, phlegmatic and now thin, was still not homely. All these years
he had found her satisfactory enough; but now his dissatisfaction with
her began to increase. She was not like Aileen--not young, not vivid,
not as unschooled in the commonplaces of life. And while ordinarily, he
was not one who was inclined to be querulous, still now on occasion,
he could be. He began by asking questions concerning his wife's
appearance--irritating little whys which are so trivial and yet so
exasperating and discouraging to a woman. Why didn't she get a mauve
hat nearer the shade of her dress? Why didn't she go out more? Exercise
would do her good. Why didn't she do this, and why didn't she do that?
He scarcely noticed that he was doing this; but she did, and she felt
the undertone--the real significance--and took umbrage.

"Oh, why--why?" she retorted, one day, curtly. "Why do you ask so many
questions? You don't care so much for me any more; that's why. I can
tell."

He leaned back startled by the thrust. It had not been based on any
evidence of anything save his recent remarks; but he was not absolutely
sure. He was just the least bit sorry that he had irritated her, and he
said so.

"Oh, it's all right," she replied. "I don't care. But I notice that you
don't pay as much attention to me as you used to. It's your business
now, first, last, and all the time. You can't get your mind off of
that."

He breathed a sigh of relief. She didn't suspect, then.

But after a little time, as he grew more and more in sympathy with
Aileen, he was not so disturbed as to whether his wife might suspect
or not. He began to think on occasion, as his mind followed the various
ramifications of the situation, that it would be better if she did. She
was really not of the contentious fighting sort. He now decided because
of various calculations in regard to her character that she might not
offer as much resistance to some ultimate rearrangement, as he had
originally imagined. She might even divorce him. Desire, dreams, even
in him were evoking calculations not as sound as those which ordinarily
generated in his brain.

No, as he now said to himself, the rub was not nearly so much in his own
home, as it was in the Butler family. His relations with Edward Malia
Butler had become very intimate. He was now advising with him constantly
in regard to the handling of his securities, which were numerous.
Butler held stocks in such things as the Pennsylvania Coal Company,
the Delaware and Hudson Canal, the Morris and Essex Canal, the Reading
Railroad. As the old gentleman's mind had broadened to the significance
of the local street-railway problem in Philadelphia, he had decided to
close out his other securities at such advantageous terms as he could,
and reinvest the money in local lines. He knew that Mollenhauer
and Simpson were doing this, and they were excellent judges of the
significance of local affairs. Like Cowperwood, he had the idea that if
he controlled sufficient of the local situation in this field, he
could at last effect a joint relationship with Mollenhauer and Simpson.
Political legislation, advantageous to the combined lines, could then
be so easily secured. Franchises and necessary extensions to existing
franchises could be added. This conversion of his outstanding stock
in other fields, and the picking up of odd lots in the local
street-railway, was the business of Cowperwood. Butler, through his
sons, Owen and Callum, was also busy planning a new line and obtaining a
franchise, sacrificing, of course, great blocks of stock and actual cash
to others, in order to obtain sufficient influence to have the necessary
legislation passed. Yet it was no easy matter, seeing that others knew
what the general advantages of the situation were, and because of this
Cowperwood, who saw the great source of profit here, was able, betimes,
to serve himself--buying blocks, a part of which only went to Butler,
Mollenhauer or others. In short he was not as eager to serve Butler, or
any one else, as he was to serve himself if he could.

In this connection, the scheme which George W. Stener had brought
forward, representing actually in the background Strobik, Wycroft, and
Harmon, was an opening wedge for himself. Stener's plan was to loan him
money out of the city treasury at two per cent., or, if he would waive
all commissions, for nothing (an agent for self-protective purposes
was absolutely necessary), and with it take over the North Pennsylvania
Company's line on Front Street, which, because of the shortness of its
length, one mile and a half, and the brevity of the duration of its
franchise, was neither doing very well nor being rated very high.
Cowperwood in return for his manipulative skill was to have a fair
proportion of the stock--twenty per cent. Strobik and Wycroft knew the
parties from whom the bulk of the stock could be secured if engineered
properly. Their plan was then, with this borrowed treasury money, to
extend its franchise and then the line itself, and then later again, by
issuing a great block of stock and hypothecating it with a favored bank,
be able to return the principal to the city treasury and pocket their
profits from the line as earned. There was no trouble in this, in so far
as Cowperwood was concerned, except that it divided the stock very badly
among these various individuals, and left him but a comparatively small
share--for his thought and pains.

But Cowperwood was an opportunist. And by this time his financial
morality had become special and local in its character. He did not think
it was wise for any one to steal anything from anybody where the act of
taking or profiting was directly and plainly considered stealing.
That was unwise--dangerous--hence wrong. There were so many situations
wherein what one might do in the way of taking or profiting was open
to discussion and doubt. Morality varied, in his mind at least, with
conditions, if not climates. Here, in Philadelphia, the tradition
(politically, mind you--not generally) was that the city treasurer might
use the money of the city without interest so long as he returned the
principal intact. The city treasury and the city treasurer were like
a honey-laden hive and a queen bee around which the drones--the
politicians--swarmed in the hope of profit. The one disagreeable thing
in connection with this transaction with Stener was that neither Butler,
Mollenhauer nor Simpson, who were the actual superiors of Stener and
Strobik, knew anything about it. Stener and those behind him were,
through him, acting for themselves. If the larger powers heard of this,
it might alienate them. He had to think of this. Still, if he refused
to make advantageous deals with Stener or any other man influential in
local affairs, he was cutting off his nose to spite his face, for other
bankers and brokers would, and gladly. And besides it was not at all
certain that Butler, Mollenhauer, and Simpson would ever hear.

In this connection, there was another line, which he rode on
occasionally, the Seventeenth and Nineteenth Street line, which he felt
was a much more interesting thing for him to think about, if he could
raise the money. It had been originally capitalized for five hundred
thousand dollars; but there had been a series of bonds to the value of
two hundred and fifty thousand dollars added for improvements, and the
company was finding great difficulty in meeting the interest. The bulk
of the stock was scattered about among small investors, and it would
require all of two hundred and fifty thousand dollars to collect it and
have himself elected president or chairman of the board of directors.
Once in, however, he could vote this stock as he pleased, hypothecating
it meanwhile at his father's bank for as much as he could get, and
issuing more stocks with which to bribe legislators in the matter of
extending the line, and in taking up other opportunities to either
add to it by purchase or supplement it by working agreements. The
word "bribe" is used here in this matter-of-fact American way, because
bribery was what was in every one's mind in connection with the State
legislature. Terrence Relihan--the small, dark-faced Irishman, a
dandy in dress and manners--who represented the financial interests at
Harrisburg, and who had come to Cowperwood after the five million bond
deal had been printed, had told him that nothing could be done at the
capital without money, or its equivalent, negotiable securities. Each
significant legislator, if he yielded his vote or his influence, must be
looked after. If he, Cowperwood, had any scheme which he wanted handled
at any time, Relihan had intimated to him that he would be glad to talk
with him. Cowperwood had figured on this Seventeenth and Nineteenth
Street line scheme more than once, but he had never felt quite sure that
he was willing to undertake it. His obligations in other directions were
so large. But the lure was there, and he pondered and pondered.

Stener's scheme of loaning him money wherewith to manipulate the North
Pennsylvania line deal put this Seventeenth and Nineteenth Street dream
in a more favorable light. As it was he was constantly watching the
certificates of loan issue, for the city treasury,--buying large
quantities when the market was falling to protect it and selling
heavily, though cautiously, when he saw it rising and to do this he
had to have a great deal of free money to permit him to do it. He was
constantly fearful of some break in the market which would affect the
value of all his securities and result in the calling of his loans.
There was no storm in sight. He did not see that anything could happen
in reason; but he did not want to spread himself out too thin. As he saw
it now, therefore if he took one hundred and fifty thousand dollars of
this city money and went after this Seventeenth and Nineteenth Street
matter it would not mean that he was spreading himself out too thin, for
because of this new proposition could he not call on Stener for more as
a loan in connection with these other ventures? But if anything should
happen--well--

"Frank," said Stener, strolling into his office one afternoon after four
o'clock when the main rush of the day's work was over--the relationship
between Cowperwood and Stener had long since reached the "Frank" and
"George" period--"Strobik thinks he has that North Pennsylvania
deal arranged so that we can take it up if we want to. The principal
stockholder, we find, is a man by the name of Coltan--not Ike Colton,
but Ferdinand. How's that for a name?" Stener beamed fatly and genially.

Things had changed considerably for him since the days when he had been
fortuitously and almost indifferently made city treasurer. His method
of dressing had so much improved since he had been inducted into office,
and his manner expressed so much more good feeling, confidence, aplomb,
that he would not have recognized himself if he had been permitted
to see himself as had those who had known him before. An old, nervous
shifting of the eyes had almost ceased, and a feeling of restfulness,
which had previously been restlessness, and had sprung from a sense of
necessity, had taken its place. His large feet were incased in good,
square-toed, soft-leather shoes; his stocky chest and fat legs were made
somewhat agreeable to the eye by a well-cut suit of brownish-gray cloth;
and his neck was now surrounded by a low, wing-point white collar and
brown-silk tie. His ample chest, which spread out a little lower in
around and constantly enlarging stomach, was ornamented by a heavy-link
gold chain, and his white cuffs had large gold cuff-buttons set with
rubies of a very notable size. He was rosy and decidedly well fed. In
fact, he was doing very well indeed.

He had moved his family from a shabby two-story frame house in South
Ninth Street to a very comfortable brick one three stories in height,
and three times as large, on Spring Garden Street. His wife had a
few acquaintances--the wives of other politicians. His children were
attending the high school, a thing he had hardly hoped for in earlier
days. He was now the owner of fourteen or fifteen pieces of cheap real
estate in different portions of the city, which might eventually become
very valuable, and he was a silent partner in the South Philadelphia
Foundry Company and the American Beef and Pork Company, two corporations
on paper whose principal business was subletting contracts secured
from the city to the humble butchers and foundrymen who would carry out
orders as given and not talk too much or ask questions.

"Well, that is an odd name," said Cowperwood, blandly. "So he has it? I
never thought that road would pay, as it was laid out. It's too short.
It ought to run about three miles farther out into the Kensington
section."

"You're right," said Stener, dully.

"Did Strobik say what Colton wants for his shares?"

"Sixty-eight, I think."

"The current market rate. He doesn't want much, does he? Well, George,
at that rate it will take about"--he calculated quickly on the basis
of the number of shares Cotton was holding--"one hundred and twenty
thousand to get him out alone. That isn't all. There's Judge Kitchen
and Joseph Zimmerman and Senator Donovan"--he was referring to the State
senator of that name. "You'll be paying a pretty fair price for that
stud when you get it. It will cost considerable more to extend the line.
It's too much, I think."

Cowperwood was thinking how easy it would be to combine this line with
his dreamed-of Seventeenth and Nineteenth Street line, and after a time
and with this in view he added:

"Say, George, why do you work all your schemes through Strobik and
Harmon and Wycroft? Couldn't you and I manage some of these things for
ourselves alone instead of for three or four? It seems to me that plan
would be much more profitable to you."

"It would, it would!" exclaimed Stener, his round eyes fixed on
Cowperwood in a rather helpless, appealing way. He liked Cowperwood and
had always been hoping that mentally as well as financially he could
get close to him. "I've thought of that. But these fellows have had more
experience in these matters than I have had, Frank. They've been longer
at the game. I don't know as much about these things as they do."

Cowperwood smiled in his soul, though his face remained passive.

"Don't worry about them, George," he continued genially and
confidentially. "You and I together can know and do as much as they ever
could and more. I'm telling you. Take this railroad deal you're in on
now, George; you and I could manipulate that just as well and better
than it can be done with Wycroft, Strobik, and Harmon in on it. They're
not adding anything to the wisdom of the situation. They're not putting
up any money. You're doing that. All they're doing is agreeing to see it
through the legislature and the council, and as far as the legislature
is concerned, they can't do any more with that than any one else
could--than I could, for instance. It's all a question of arranging
things with Relihan, anyhow, putting up a certain amount of money for
him to work with. Here in town there are other people who can reach the
council just as well as Strobik." He was thinking (once he controlled
a road of his own) of conferring with Butler and getting him to use his
influence. It would serve to quiet Strobik and his friends. "I'm not
asking you to change your plans on this North Pennsylvania deal. You
couldn't do that very well. But there are other things. In the future
why not let's see if you and I can't work some one thing together?
You'll be much better off, and so will I. We've done pretty well on the
city-loan proposition so far, haven't we?"

The truth was, they had done exceedingly well. Aside from what the
higher powers had made, Stener's new house, his lots, his bank-account,
his good clothes, and his changed and comfortable sense of life were
largely due to Cowperwood's successful manipulation of these city-loan
certificates. Already there had been four issues of two hundred thousand
dollars each. Cowperwood had bought and sold nearly three million
dollars' worth of these certificates, acting one time as a "bull" and
another as a "bear." Stener was now worth all of one hundred and fifty
thousand dollars.

"There's a line that I know of here in the city which could be made into
a splendidly paying property," continued Cowperwood, meditatively,
"if the right things could be done with it. Just like this North
Pennsylvania line, it isn't long enough. The territory it serves isn't
big enough. It ought to be extended; but if you and I could get it, it
might eventually be worked with this North Pennsylvania Company or some
other as one company. That would save officers and offices and a lot
of things. There is always money to be made out of a larger purchasing
power."

He paused and looked out the window of his handsome little hardwood
office, speculating upon the future. The window gave nowhere save into
a back yard behind another office building which had formerly been a
residence. Some grass grew feebly there. The red wall and old-fashioned
brick fence which divided it from the next lot reminded him somehow of
his old home in New Market Street, to which his Uncle Seneca used to
come as a Cuban trader followed by his black Portuguese servitor. He
could see him now as he sat here looking at the yard.

"Well," asked Stener, ambitiously, taking the bait, "why don't we get
hold of that--you and me? I suppose I could fix it so far as the money
is concerned. How much would it take?"

Cowperwood smiled inwardly again.

"I don't know exactly," he said, after a time. "I want to look into it
more carefully. The one trouble is that I'm carrying a good deal of the
city's money as it is. You see, I have that two hundred thousand dollars
against your city-loan deals. And this new scheme will take two or three
hundred thousand more. If that were out of the way--"

He was thinking of one of the inexplicable stock panics--those strange
American depressions which had so much to do with the temperament of the
people, and so little to do with the basic conditions of the country.
"If this North Pennsylvania deal were through and done with--"

He rubbed his chin and pulled at his handsome silky mustache.

"Don't ask me any more about it, George," he said, finally, as he saw
that the latter was beginning to think as to which line it might be.
"Don't say anything at all about it. I want to get my facts exactly
right, and then I'll talk to you. I think you and I can do this thing a
little later, when we get the North Pennsylvania scheme under way. I'm
so rushed just now I'm not sure that I want to undertake it at once; but
you keep quiet and we'll see." He turned toward his desk, and Stener got
up.

"I'll make any sized deposit with you that you wish, the moment you
think you're ready to act, Frank," exclaimed Stener, and with the
thought that Cowperwood was not nearly as anxious to do this as he
should be, since he could always rely on him (Stener) when there was
anything really profitable in the offing. Why should not the able and
wonderful Cowperwood be allowed to make the two of them rich? "Just
notify Stires, and he'll send you a check. Strobik thought we ought to
act pretty soon."

"I'll tend to it, George," replied Cowperwood, confidently. "It will
come out all right. Leave it to me."

Stener kicked his stout legs to straighten his trousers, and extended
his hand. He strolled out in the street thinking of this new scheme.
Certainly, if he could get in with Cowperwood right he would be a rich
man, for Cowperwood was so successful and so cautious. His new house,
this beautiful banking office, his growing fame, and his subtle
connections with Butler and others put Stener in considerable awe of
him. Another line! They would control it and the North Pennsylvania!
Why, if this went on, he might become a magnate--he really might--he,
George W. Stener, once a cheap real-estate and insurance agent. He
strolled up the street thinking, but with no more idea of the importance
of his civic duties and the nature of the social ethics against which he
was offending than if they had never existed.





Chapter XXII


The services which Cowperwood performed during the ensuing year and a
half for Stener, Strobik, Butler, State Treasurer Van Nostrand, State
Senator Relihan, representative of "the interests," so-called, at
Harrisburg, and various banks which were friendly to these gentlemen,
were numerous and confidential. For Stener, Strobik, Wycroft, Harmon and
himself he executed the North Pennsylvania deal, by which he became
a holder of a fifth of the controlling stock. Together he and Stener
joined to purchase the Seventeenth and Nineteenth Street line and in the
concurrent gambling in stocks.

By the summer of 1871, when Cowperwood was nearly thirty-four years of
age, he had a banking business estimated at nearly two million dollars,
personal holdings aggregating nearly half a million, and prospects which
other things being equal looked to wealth which might rival that of
any American. The city, through its treasurer--still Mr. Stener--was
a depositor with him to the extent of nearly five hundred thousand
dollars. The State, through its State treasurer, Van Nostrand, carried
two hundred thousand dollars on his books. Bode was speculating in
street-railway stocks to the extent of fifty thousand dollars. Relihan
to the same amount. A small army of politicians and political hangers-on
were on his books for various sums. And for Edward Malia Butler he
occasionally carried as high as one hundred thousand dollars in margins.
His own loans at the banks, varying from day to day on variously
hypothecated securities, were as high as seven and eight hundred
thousand dollars. Like a spider in a spangled net, every thread of which
he knew, had laid, had tested, he had surrounded and entangled himself
in a splendid, glittering network of connections, and he was watching
all the details.

His one pet idea, the thing he put more faith in than anything else, was
his street-railway manipulations, and particularly his actual control of
the Seventeenth and Nineteenth Street line. Through an advance to him,
on deposit, made in his bank by Stener at a time when the stock of the
Seventeenth and Nineteenth Street line was at a low ebb, he had managed
to pick up fifty-one per cent. of the stock for himself and Stener,
by virtue of which he was able to do as he pleased with the road.
To accomplish this, however, he had resorted to some very "peculiar"
methods, as they afterward came to be termed in financial circles, to
get this stock at his own valuation. Through agents he caused suits for
damages to be brought against the company for non-payment of interest
due. A little stock in the hands of a hireling, a request made to
a court of record to examine the books of the company in order to
determine whether a receivership were not advisable, a simultaneous
attack in the stock market, selling at three, five, seven, and ten
points off, brought the frightened stockholders into the market with
their holdings. The banks considered the line a poor risk, and called
their loans in connection with it. His father's bank had made one loan
to one of the principal stockholders, and that was promptly called, of
course. Then, through an agent, the several heaviest shareholders were
approached and an offer was made to help them out. The stocks would
be taken off their hands at forty. They had not really been able to
discover the source of all their woes; and they imagined that the road
was in bad condition, which it was not. Better let it go. The money was
immediately forthcoming, and Cowperwood and Stener jointly controlled
fifty-one per cent. But, as in the case of the North Pennsylvania line,
Cowperwood had been quietly buying all of the small minority holdings,
so that he had in reality fifty-one per cent. of the stock, and Stener
twenty-five per cent. more.

This intoxicated him, for immediately he saw the opportunity of
fulfilling his long-contemplated dream--that of reorganizing the company
in conjunction with the North Pennsylvania line, issuing three shares
where one had been before and after unloading all but a control on the
general public, using the money secured to buy into other lines which
were to be boomed and sold in the same way. In short, he was one of
those early, daring manipulators who later were to seize upon other
and ever larger phases of American natural development for their own
aggrandizement.

In connection with this first consolidation, his plan was to spread
rumors of the coming consolidation of the two lines, to appeal to
the legislature for privileges of extension, to get up an arresting
prospectus and later annual reports, and to boom the stock on the stock
exchange as much as his swelling resources would permit. The trouble is
that when you are trying to make a market for a stock--to unload a large
issue such as his was (over five hundred thousand dollars' worth)--while
retaining five hundred thousand for yourself, it requires large capital
to handle it. The owner in these cases is compelled not only to go on
the market and do much fictitious buying, thus creating a fictitious
demand, but once this fictitious demand has deceived the public and he
has been able to unload a considerable quantity of his wares, he is,
unless he rids himself of all his stock, compelled to stand behind it.
If, for instance, he sold five thousand shares, as was done in this
instance, and retained five thousand, he must see that the public price
of the outstanding five thousand shares did not fall below a certain
point, because the value of his private shares would fall with it.
And if, as is almost always the case, the private shares had been
hypothecated with banks and trust companies for money wherewith to
conduct other enterprises, the falling of their value in the open market
merely meant that the banks would call for large margins to protect
their loans or call their loans entirely. This meant that his work was
a failure, and he might readily fail. He was already conducting one such
difficult campaign in connection with this city-loan deal, the price of
which varied from day to day, and which he was only too anxious to have
vary, for in the main he profited by these changes.

But this second burden, interesting enough as it was, meant that he
had to be doubly watchful. Once the stock was sold at a high price,
the money borrowed from the city treasurer could be returned; his
own holdings created out of foresight, by capitalizing the future, by
writing the shrewd prospectuses and reports, would be worth their face
value, or little less. He would have money to invest in other lines.
He might obtain the financial direction of the whole, in which case he
would be worth millions. One shrewd thing he did, which indicated the
foresight and subtlety of the man, was to make a separate organization
or company of any extension or addition which he made to his line. Thus,
if he had two or three miles of track on a street, and he wanted to
extend it two or three miles farther on the same street, instead of
including this extension in the existing corporation, he would make a
second corporation to control the additional two or three miles of
right of way. This corporation he would capitalize at so much, and issue
stocks and bonds for its construction, equipment, and manipulation.
Having done this he would then take the sub-corporation over into the
parent concern, issuing more stocks and bonds of the parent company
wherewith to do it, and, of course, selling these bonds to the
public. Even his brothers who worked for him did not know the various
ramifications of his numerous deals, and executed his orders blindly.
Sometimes Joseph said to Edward, in a puzzled way, "Well, Frank knows
what he is about, I guess."

On the other hand, he was most careful to see that every current
obligation was instantly met, and even anticipated, for he wanted to
make a great show of regularity. Nothing was so precious as reputation
and standing. His forethought, caution, and promptness pleased the
bankers. They thought he was one of the sanest, shrewdest men they had
ever met.

However, by the spring and summer of 1871, Cowperwood had actually,
without being in any conceivable danger from any source, spread
himself out very thin. Because of his great success he had grown more
liberal--easier--in his financial ventures. By degrees, and largely
because of his own confidence in himself, he had induced his father
to enter upon his street-car speculations, to use the resources of the
Third National to carry a part of his loans and to furnish capital at
such times as quick resources were necessary. In the beginning the old
gentleman had been a little nervous and skeptical, but as time had worn
on and nothing but profit eventuated, he grew bolder and more confident.

"Frank," he would say, looking up over his spectacles, "aren't you
afraid you're going a little too fast in these matters? You're carrying
a lot of loans these days."

"No more than I ever did, father, considering my resources. You can't
turn large deals without large loans. You know that as well as I do."

"Yes, I know, but--now that Green and Coates--aren't you going pretty
strong there?"

"Not at all. I know the inside conditions there. The stock is bound to
go up eventually. I'll bull it up. I'll combine it with my other lines,
if necessary."

Cowperwood stared at his boy. Never was there such a defiant, daring
manipulator.

"You needn't worry about me, father. If you are going to do that, call
my loans. Other banks will loan on my stocks. I'd like to see your bank
have the interest."

So Cowperwood, Sr., was convinced. There was no gainsaying this
argument. His bank was loaning Frank heavily, but not more so than any
other. And as for the great blocks of stocks he was carrying in his
son's companies, he was to be told when to get out should that prove
necessary. Frank's brothers were being aided in the same way to
make money on the side, and their interests were also now bound up
indissolubly with his own.

With his growing financial opportunities, however, Cowperwood had also
grown very liberal in what might be termed his standard of living.
Certain young art dealers in Philadelphia, learning of his artistic
inclinations and his growing wealth, had followed him up with
suggestions as to furniture, tapestries, rugs, objects of art,
and paintings--at first the American and later the foreign masters
exclusively. His own and his father's house had not been furnished fully
in these matters, and there was that other house in North Tenth Street,
which he desired to make beautiful. Aileen had always objected to the
condition of her own home. Love of distinguished surroundings was a
basic longing with her, though she had not the gift of interpreting
her longings. But this place where they were secretly meeting must be
beautiful. She was as keen for that as he was. So it became a veritable
treasure-trove, more distinguished in furnishings than some of the rooms
of his own home. He began to gather here some rare examples of altar
cloths, rugs, and tapestries of the Middle Ages. He bought furniture
after the Georgian theory--a combination of Chippendale, Sheraton, and
Heppelwhite modified by the Italian Renaissance and the French Louis. He
learned of handsome examples of porcelain, statuary, Greek vase forms,
lovely collections of Japanese ivories and netsukes. Fletcher Gray,
a partner in Cable & Gray, a local firm of importers of art objects,
called on him in connection with a tapestry of the fourteenth century
weaving. Gray was an enthusiast and almost instantly he conveyed some of
his suppressed and yet fiery love of the beautiful to Cowperwood.

"There are fifty periods of one shade of blue porcelain alone, Mr.
Cowperwood," Gray informed him. "There are at least seven distinct
schools or periods of rugs--Persian, Armenian, Arabian, Flemish, Modern
Polish, Hungarian, and so on. If you ever went into that, it
would be a distinguished thing to get a complete--I mean a
representative--collection of some one period, or of all these periods.
They are beautiful. I have seen some of them, others I've read about."

"You'll make a convert of me yet, Fletcher," replied Cowperwood. "You or
art will be the ruin of me. I'm inclined that way temperamentally as it
is, I think, and between you and Ellsworth and Gordon Strake"--another
young man intensely interested in painting--"you'll complete my
downfall. Strake has a splendid idea. He wants me to begin right
now--I'm using that word 'right' in the sense of 'properly,'" he
commented--"and get what examples I can of just the few rare things in
each school or period of art which would properly illustrate each. He
tells me the great pictures are going to increase in value, and what I
could get for a few hundred thousand now will be worth millions later.
He doesn't want me to bother with American art."

"He's right," exclaimed Gray, "although it isn't good business for me to
praise another art man. It would take a great deal of money, though."

"Not so very much. At least, not all at once. It would be a matter
of years, of course. Strake thinks that some excellent examples of
different periods could be picked up now and later replaced if anything
better in the same held showed up."

His mind, in spite of his outward placidity, was tinged with a great
seeking. Wealth, in the beginning, had seemed the only goal, to which
had been added the beauty of women. And now art, for art's sake--the
first faint radiance of a rosy dawn--had begun to shine in upon him, and
to the beauty of womanhood he was beginning to see how necessary it was
to add the beauty of life--the beauty of material background--how, in
fact, the only background for great beauty was great art. This girl,
this Aileen Butler, her raw youth and radiance, was nevertheless
creating in him a sense of the distinguished and a need for it which
had never existed in him before to the same degree. It is impossible to
define these subtleties of reaction, temperament on temperament, for no
one knows to what degree we are marked by the things which attract us. A
love affair such as this had proved to be was little less or more than a
drop of coloring added to a glass of clear water, or a foreign chemical
agent introduced into a delicate chemical formula.

In short, for all her crudeness, Aileen Butler was a definite force
personally. Her nature, in a way, a protest against the clumsy
conditions by which she found herself surrounded, was almost
irrationally ambitious. To think that for so long, having been born into
the Butler family, she had been the subject, as well as the victim of
such commonplace and inartistic illusions and conditions, whereas now,
owing to her contact with, and mental subordination to Cowperwood, she
was learning so many wonderful phases of social, as well as financial,
refinement of which previously she had guessed nothing. The wonder, for
instance, of a future social career as the wife of such a man as Frank
Cowperwood. The beauty and resourcefulness of his mind, which, after
hours of intimate contact with her, he was pleased to reveal, and which,
so definite were his comments and instructions, she could not fail
to sense. The wonder of his financial and artistic and future social
dreams. And, oh, oh, she was his, and he was hers. She was actually
beside herself at times with the glory, as well as the delight of all
this.

At the same time, her father's local reputation as a quondam garbage
contractor ("slop-collector" was the unfeeling comment of the vulgarian
cognoscenti); her own unavailing efforts to right a condition of
material vulgarity or artistic anarchy in her own home; the hopelessness
of ever being admitted to those distinguished portals which she
recognized afar off as the last sanctum sanctorum of established
respectability and social distinction, had bred in her, even at this
early age, a feeling of deadly opposition to her home conditions as they
stood. Such a house compared to Cowperwood's! Her dear, but ignorant,
father! And this great man, her lover, had now condescended to love
her--see in her his future wife. Oh, God, that it might not fail!
Through the Cowperwoods at first she had hoped to meet a few people,
young men and women--and particularly men--who were above the station in
which she found herself, and to whom her beauty and prospective fortune
would commend her; but this had not been the case. The Cowperwoods
themselves, in spite of Frank Cowperwood's artistic proclivities and
growing wealth, had not penetrated the inner circle as yet. In fact,
aside from the subtle, preliminary consideration which they were
receiving, they were a long way off.

None the less, and instinctively in Cowperwood Aileen recognized a way
out--a door--and by the same token a subtle, impending artistic future
of great magnificence. This man would rise beyond anything he
now dreamed of--she felt it. There was in him, in some nebulous,
unrecognizable form, a great artistic reality which was finer than
anything she could plan for herself. She wanted luxury, magnificence,
social station. Well, if she could get this man they would come to her.
There were, apparently, insuperable barriers in the way; but hers was no
weakling nature, and neither was his. They ran together temperamentally
from the first like two leopards. Her own thoughts--crude, half
formulated, half spoken--nevertheless matched his to a degree in the
equality of their force and their raw directness.

"I don't think papa knows how to do," she said to him, one day. "It
isn't his fault. He can't help it. He knows that he can't. And he knows
that I know it. For years I wanted him to move out of that old house
there. He knows that he ought to. But even that wouldn't do much good."

She paused, looking at him with a straight, clear, vigorous glance.
He liked the medallion sharpness of her features--their smooth, Greek
modeling.

"Never mind, pet," he replied. "We will arrange all these things later.
I don't see my way out of this just now; but I think the best thing to
do is to confess to Lillian some day, and see if some other plan can't
be arranged. I want to fix it so the children won't suffer. I can
provide for them amply, and I wouldn't be at all surprised if Lillian
would be willing to let me go. She certainly wouldn't want any
publicity."

He was counting practically, and man-fashion, on her love for her
children.

Aileen looked at him with clear, questioning, uncertain eyes. She was
not wholly without sympathy, but in a way this situation did not appeal
to her as needing much. Mrs. Cowperwood was not friendly in her mood
toward her. It was not based on anything save a difference in their
point of view. Mrs. Cowperwood could never understand how a girl could
carry her head so high and "put on such airs," and Aileen could not
understand how any one could be so lymphatic and lackadaisical as
Lillian Cowperwood. Life was made for riding, driving, dancing, going.
It was made for airs and banter and persiflage and coquetry. To see this
woman, the wife of a young, forceful man like Cowperwood, acting, even
though she were five years older and the mother of two children, as
though life on its romantic and enthusiastic pleasurable side were all
over was too much for her. Of course Lillian was unsuited to Frank; of
course he needed a young woman like herself, and fate would surely give
him to her. Then what a delicious life they would lead!

"Oh, Frank," she exclaimed to him, over and over, "if we could only
manage it. Do you think we can?"

"Do I think we can? Certainly I do. It's only a matter of time. I think
if I were to put the matter to her clearly, she wouldn't expect me to
stay. You look out how you conduct your affairs. If your father or your
brother should ever suspect me, there'd be an explosion in this town,
if nothing worse. They'd fight me in all my money deals, if they didn't
kill me. Are you thinking carefully of what you are doing?"

"All the time. If anything happens I'll deny everything. They can't
prove it, if I deny it. I'll come to you in the long run, just the
same."

They were in the Tenth Street house at the time. She stroked his cheeks
with the loving fingers of the wildly enamored woman.

"I'll do anything for you, sweetheart," she declared. "I'd die for you
if I had to. I love you so."

"Well, pet, no danger. You won't have to do anything like that. But be
careful."





Chapter XXIII


Then, after several years of this secret relationship, in which the ties
of sympathy and understanding grew stronger instead of weaker, came
the storm. It burst unexpectedly and out of a clear sky, and bore no
relation to the intention or volition of any individual. It was nothing
more than a fire, a distant one--the great Chicago fire, October 7th,
1871, which burned that city--its vast commercial section--to the
ground, and instantly and incidentally produced a financial panic,
vicious though of short duration in various other cities in America.
The fire began on Saturday and continued apparently unabated until the
following Wednesday. It destroyed the banks, the commercial houses, the
shipping conveniences, and vast stretches of property. The heaviest loss
fell naturally upon the insurance companies, which instantly, in many
cases--the majority--closed their doors. This threw the loss back on the
manufacturers and wholesalers in other cities who had had dealings with
Chicago as well as the merchants of that city. Again, very grievous
losses were borne by the host of eastern capitalists which had for years
past partly owned, or held heavy mortgages on, the magnificent buildings
for business purposes and residences in which Chicago was already
rivaling every city on the continent. Transportation was disturbed, and
the keen scent of Wall Street, and Third Street in Philadelphia, and
State Street in Boston, instantly perceived in the early reports the
gravity of the situation. Nothing could be done on Saturday or Sunday
after the exchange closed, for the opening reports came too late. On
Monday, however, the facts were pouring in thick and fast; and the
owners of railroad securities, government securities, street-car
securities, and, indeed, all other forms of stocks and bonds, began to
throw them on the market in order to raise cash. The banks naturally
were calling their loans, and the result was a stock stampede which
equaled the Black Friday of Wall Street of two years before.

Cowperwood and his father were out of town at the time the fire began.
They had gone with several friends--bankers--to look at a proposed route
of extension of a local steam-railroad, on which a loan was desired.
In buggies they had driven over a good portion of the route, and were
returning to Philadelphia late Sunday evening when the cries of newsboys
hawking an "extra" reached their ears.

"Ho! Extra! Extra! All about the big Chicago fire!"

"Ho! Extra! Extra! Chicago burning down! Extra! Extra!"

The cries were long-drawn-out, ominous, pathetic. In the dusk of the
dreary Sunday afternoon, when the city had apparently retired to Sabbath
meditation and prayer, with that tinge of the dying year in the foliage
and in the air, one caught a sense of something grim and gloomy.

"Hey, boy," called Cowperwood, listening, seeing a shabbily clothed
misfit of a boy with a bundle of papers under his arm turning a corner.
"What's that? Chicago burning!"

He looked at his father and the other men in a significant way as he
reached for the paper, and then, glancing at the headlines, realized the
worst.

ALL CHICAGO BURNING

FIRE RAGES UNCHECKED IN COMMERCIAL SECTION SINCE YESTERDAY EVENING.
BANKS, COMMERCIAL HOUSES, PUBLIC BUILDINGS IN RUINS. DIRECT TELEGRAPHIC
COMMUNICATION SUSPENDED SINCE THREE O'CLOCK TO-DAY. NO END TO PROGRESS
OF DISASTER IN SIGHT.

"That looks rather serious," he said, calmly, to his companions, a cold,
commanding force coming into his eyes and voice. To his father he said
a little later, "It's panic, unless the majority of the banks and
brokerage firms stand together."

He was thinking quickly, brilliantly, resourcefully of his own
outstanding obligations. His father's bank was carrying one hundred
thousand dollars' worth of his street-railway securities at sixty, and
fifty thousand dollars' worth of city loan at seventy. His father
had "up with him" over forty thousand dollars in cash covering market
manipulations in these stocks. The banking house of Drexel & Co. was on
his books as a creditor for one hundred thousand, and that loan would be
called unless they were especially merciful, which was not likely.
Jay Cooke & Co. were his creditors for another one hundred and fifty
thousand. They would want their money. At four smaller banks and three
brokerage companies he was debtor for sums ranging from fifty thousand
dollars down. The city treasurer was involved with him to the extent of
nearly five hundred thousand dollars, and exposure of that would create
a scandal; the State treasurer for two hundred thousand. There were
small accounts, hundreds of them, ranging from one hundred dollars up
to five and ten thousand. A panic would mean not only a withdrawal of
deposits and a calling of loans, but a heavy depression of securities.
How could he realize on his securities?--that was the question--how
without selling so many points off that his fortune would be swept away
and he would be ruined?

He figured briskly the while he waved adieu to his friends, who hurried
away, struck with their own predicament.

"You had better go on out to the house, father, and I'll send some
telegrams." (The telephone had not yet been invented.) "I'll be right
out and we'll go into this thing together. It looks like black weather
to me. Don't say anything to any one until after we have had our talk;
then we can decide what to do."

Cowperwood, Sr., was already plucking at his side-whiskers in a confused
and troubled way. He was cogitating as to what might happen to him
in case his son failed, for he was deeply involved with him. He was
a little gray in his complexion now, frightened, for he had already
strained many points in his affairs to accommodate his son. If Frank
should not be able promptly on the morrow to meet the call which the
bank might have to make for one hundred and fifty thousand dollars, the
onus and scandal of the situation would be on him.

On the other hand, his son was meditating on the tangled relation in
which he now found himself in connection with the city treasurer and the
fact that it was not possible for him to support the market alone. Those
who should have been in a position to help him were now as bad off as
himself. There were many unfavorable points in the whole situation.
Drexel & Co. had been booming railway stocks--loaning heavily on them.
Jay Cooke & Co. had been backing Northern Pacific--were practically
doing their best to build that immense transcontinental system alone.
Naturally, they were long on that and hence in a ticklish position. At
the first word they would throw over their surest securities--government
bonds, and the like--in order to protect their more speculative
holdings. The bears would see the point. They would hammer and hammer,
selling short all along the line. But he did not dare to do that. He
would be breaking his own back quickly, and what he needed was time. If
he could only get time--three days, a week, ten days--this storm would
surely blow over.

The thing that was troubling him most was the matter of the half-million
invested with him by Stener. A fall election was drawing near. Stener,
although he had served two terms, was slated for reelection. A scandal
in connection with the city treasury would be a very bad thing. It would
end Stener's career as an official--would very likely send him to the
penitentiary. It might wreck the Republican party's chances to win. It
would certainly involve himself as having much to do with it. If that
happened, he would have the politicians to reckon with. For, if he were
hard pressed, as he would be, and failed, the fact that he had been
trying to invade the city street-railway preserves which they held
sacred to themselves, with borrowed city money, and that this borrowing
was liable to cost them the city election, would all come out. They
would not view all that with a kindly eye. It would be useless to say,
as he could, that he had borrowed the money at two per cent. (most of
it, to save himself, had been covered by a protective clause of that
kind), or that he had merely acted as an agent for Stener. That might go
down with the unsophisticated of the outer world, but it would never be
swallowed by the politicians. They knew better than that.

There was another phase to this situation, however, that encouraged him,
and that was his knowledge of how city politics were going in general.
It was useless for any politician, however loftly, to take a high and
mighty tone in a crisis like this. All of them, great and small, were
profiting in one way and another through city privileges. Butler,
Mollenhauer, and Simpson, he knew, made money out of contracts--legal
enough, though they might be looked upon as rank favoritism--and also
out of vast sums of money collected in the shape of taxes--land taxes,
water taxes, etc.--which were deposited in the various banks designated
by these men and others as legal depositories for city money. The banks
supposedly carried the city's money in their vaults as a favor,
without paying interest of any kind, and then reinvested it--for whom?
Cowperwood had no complaint to make, for he was being well treated, but
these men could scarcely expect to monopolize all the city's benefits.
He did not know either Mollenhauer or Simpson personally--but he knew
they as well as Butler had made money out of his own manipulation
of city loan. Also, Butler was most friendly to him. It was not
unreasonable for him to think, in a crisis like this, that if worst came
to worst, he could make a clean breast of it to Butler and receive aid.
In case he could not get through secretly with Stener's help, Cowperwood
made up his mind that he would do this.

His first move, he decided, would be to go at once to Stener's house and
demand the loan of an additional three or four hundred thousand dollars.
Stener had always been very tractable, and in this instance would see
how important it was that his shortage of half a million should not be
made public. Then he must get as much more as possible. But where to get
it? Presidents of banks and trust companies, large stock jobbers, and
the like, would have to be seen. Then there was a loan of one hundred
thousand dollars he was carrying for Butler. The old contractor might be
induced to leave that. He hurried to his home, secured his runabout, and
drove rapidly to Stener's.

As it turned out, however, much to his distress and confusion, Stener
was out of town--down on the Chesapeake with several friends shooting
ducks and fishing, and was not expected back for several days. He was in
the marshes back of some small town. Cowperwood sent an urgent wire to
the nearest point and then, to make assurance doubly sure, to several
other points in the same neighborhood, asking him to return immediately.
He was not at all sure, however, that Stener would return in time and
was greatly nonplussed and uncertain for the moment as to what his next
step would be. Aid must be forthcoming from somewhere and at once.

Suddenly a helpful thought occurred to him. Butler and Mollenhauer and
Simpson were long on local street-railways. They must combine to support
the situation and protect their interests. They could see the big
bankers, Drexel & Co. and Cooke & Co., and others and urge them to
sustain the market. They could strengthen things generally by organizing
a buying ring, and under cover of their support, if they would, he might
sell enough to let him out, and even permit him to go short and make
something--a whole lot. It was a brilliant thought, worthy of a greater
situation, and its only weakness was that it was not absolutely certain
of fulfillment.

He decided to go to Butler at once, the only disturbing thought being
that he would now be compelled to reveal his own and Stener's affairs.
So reentering his runabout he drove swiftly to the Butler home.

When he arrived there the famous contractor was at dinner. He had not
heard the calling of the extras, and of course, did not understand
as yet the significance of the fire. The servant's announcement of
Cowperwood brought him smiling to the door.

"Won't you come in and join us? We're just havin' a light supper. Have a
cup of coffee or tea, now--do."

"I can't," replied Cowperwood. "Not to-night, I'm in too much of a
hurry. I want to see you for just a few moments, and then I'll be off
again. I won't keep you very long."

"Why, if that's the case, I'll come right out." And Butler returned to
the dining-room to put down his napkin. Aileen, who was also dining,
had heard Cowperwood's voice, and was on the qui vive to see him. She
wondered what it was that brought him at this time of night to see her
father. She could not leave the table at once, but hoped to before he
went. Cowperwood was thinking of her, even in the face of this impending
storm, as he was of his wife, and many other things. If his affairs
came down in a heap it would go hard with those attached to him. In
this first clouding of disaster, he could not tell how things
would eventuate. He meditated on this desperately, but he was not
panic-stricken. His naturally even-molded face was set in fine, classic
lines; his eyes were as hard as chilled steel.

"Well, now," exclaimed Butler, returning, his countenance manifesting
a decidedly comfortable relationship with the world as at present
constituted. "What's up with you to-night? Nawthin' wrong, I hope. It's
been too fine a day."

"Nothing very serious, I hope myself," replied Cowperwood, "But I want
to talk with you a few minutes, anyhow. Don't you think we had better go
up to your room?"

"I was just going to say that," replied Butler--"the cigars are up
there."

They started from the reception-room to the stairs, Butler preceding
and as the contractor mounted, Aileen came out from the dining-room in
a frou-frou of silk. Her splendid hair was drawn up from the base of the
neck and the line of the forehead into some quaint convolutions which
constituted a reddish-gold crown. Her complexion was glowing, and her
bare arms and shoulders shone white against the dark red of her evening
gown. She realized there was something wrong.

"Oh, Mr. Cowperwood, how do you do?" she exclaimed, coming forward and
holding out her hand as her father went on upstairs. She was delaying
him deliberately in order to have a word with him and this bold acting
was for the benefit of the others.

"What's the trouble, honey?" she whispered, as soon as her father was
out of hearing. "You look worried."

"Nothing much, I hope, sweet," he said. "Chicago is burning up and
there's going to be trouble to-morrow. I have to talk to your father."

She had time only for a sympathetic, distressed "Oh," before he withdrew
his hand and followed Butler upstairs. She squeezed his arm, and went
through the reception-room to the parlor. She sat down, thinking, for
never before had she seen Cowperwood's face wearing such an expression
of stern, disturbed calculation. It was placid, like fine, white wax,
and quite as cold; and those deep, vague, inscrutable eyes! So Chicago
was burning. What would happen to him? Was he very much involved? He had
never told her in detail of his affairs. She would not have understood
fully any more than would have Mrs. Cowperwood. But she was worried,
nevertheless, because it was her Frank, and because she was bound to him
by what to her seemed indissoluble ties.

Literature, outside of the masters, has given us but one idea of the
mistress, the subtle, calculating siren who delights to prey on the
souls of men. The journalism and the moral pamphleteering of the time
seem to foster it with almost partisan zeal. It would seem that a
censorship of life had been established by divinity, and the care of its
execution given into the hands of the utterly conservative. Yet there
is that other form of liaison which has nothing to do with conscious
calculation. In the vast majority of cases it is without design or
guile. The average woman, controlled by her affections and deeply in
love, is no more capable than a child of anything save sacrificial
thought--the desire to give; and so long as this state endures, she
can only do this. She may change--Hell hath no fury, etc.--but the
sacrificial, yielding, solicitous attitude is more often the outstanding
characteristic of the mistress; and it is this very attitude in
contradistinction to the grasping legality of established matrimony that
has caused so many wounds in the defenses of the latter. The temperament
of man, either male or female, cannot help falling down before and
worshiping this nonseeking, sacrificial note. It approaches vast
distinction in life. It appears to be related to that last word in art,
that largeness of spirit which is the first characteristic of the
great picture, the great building, the great sculpture, the great
decoration--namely, a giving, freely and without stint, of itself, of
beauty. Hence the significance of this particular mood in Aileen.

All the subtleties of the present combination were troubling Cowperwood
as he followed Butler into the room upstairs.

"Sit down, sit down. You won't take a little somethin'? You never do.
I remember now. Well, have a cigar, anyhow. Now, what's this that's
troublin' you to-night?"

Voices could be heard faintly in the distance, far off toward the
thicker residential sections.

"Extra! Extra! All about the big Chicago fire! Chicago burning down!"

"Just that," replied Cowperwood, hearkening to them. "Have you heard the
news?"

"No. What's that they're calling?"

"It's a big fire out in Chicago."

"Oh," replied Butler, still not gathering the significance of it.

"It's burning down the business section there, Mr. Butler," went on
Cowperwood ominously, "and I fancy it's going to disturb financial
conditions here to-morrow. That is what I have come to see you about.
How are your investments? Pretty well drawn in?"

Butler suddenly gathered from Cowperwood's expression that there was
something very wrong. He put up his large hand as he leaned back in his
big leather chair, and covered his mouth and chin with it. Over those
big knuckles, and bigger nose, thick and cartilaginous, his large,
shaggy-eyebrowed eyes gleamed. His gray, bristly hair stood up stiffly
in a short, even growth all over his head.

"So that's it," he said. "You're expectin' trouble to-morrow. How are
your own affairs?"

"I'm in pretty good shape, I think, all told, if the money element of
this town doesn't lose its head and go wild. There has to be a lot of
common sense exercised to-morrow, or to-night, even. You know we are
facing a real panic. Mr. Butler, you may as well know that. It may not
last long, but while it does it will be bad. Stocks are going to drop
to-morrow ten or fifteen points on the opening. The banks are going to
call their loans unless some arrangement can be made to prevent them.
No one man can do that. It will have to be a combination of men. You and
Mr. Simpson and Mr. Mollenhauer might do it--that is, you could if you
could persuade the big banking people to combine to back the market.
There is going to be a raid on local street-railways--all of them.
Unless they are sustained the bottom is going to drop out. I have always
known that you were long on those. I thought you and Mr. Mollenhauer
and some of the others might want to act. If you don't I might as well
confess that it is going to go rather hard with me. I am not strong
enough to face this thing alone."

He was meditating on how he should tell the whole truth in regard to
Stener.

"Well, now, that's pretty bad," said Butler, calmly and meditatively.
He was thinking of his own affairs. A panic was not good for him either,
but he was not in a desperate state. He could not fail. He might lose
some money, but not a vast amount--before he could adjust things. Still
he did not care to lose any money.

"How is it you're so bad off?" he asked, curiously. He was wondering how
the fact that the bottom was going to drop out of local street-railways
would affect Cowperwood so seriously. "You're not carryin' any of them
things, are you?" he added.

It was now a question of lying or telling the truth, and Cowperwood
was literally afraid to risk lying in this dilemma. If he did not gain
Butler's comprehending support he might fail, and if he failed the truth
would come out, anyhow.

"I might as well make a clean breast of this, Mr. Butler," he said,
throwing himself on the old man's sympathies and looking at him with
that brisk assurance which Butler so greatly admired. He felt as proud
of Cowperwood at times as he did of his own sons. He felt that he had
helped to put him where he was.

"The fact is that I have been buying street-railway stocks, but not for
myself exactly. I am going to do something now which I think I ought not
to do, but I cannot help myself. If I don't do it, it will injure
you and a lot of people whom I do not wish to injure. I know you are
naturally interested in the outcome of the fall election. The truth is
I have been carrying a lot of stocks for Mr. Stener and some of his
friends. I do not know that all the money has come from the city
treasury, but I think that most of it has. I know what that means to
Mr. Stener and the Republican party and your interests in case I fail.
I don't think Mr. Stener started this of his own accord in the first
place--I think I am as much to blame as anybody--but it grew out of
other things. As you know, I handled that matter of city loan for him
and then some of his friends wanted me to invest in street-railways
for them. I have been doing that ever since. Personally I have borrowed
considerable money from Mr. Stener at two per cent. In fact, originally
the transactions were covered in that way. Now I don't want to shift the
blame on any one. It comes back to me and I am willing to let it stay
there, except that if I fail Mr. Stener will be blamed and that will
reflect on the administration. Naturally, I don't want to fail. There is
no excuse for my doing so. Aside from this panic I have never been in
a better position in my life. But I cannot weather this storm without
assistance, and I want to know if you won't help me. If I pull through
I will give you my word that I will see that the money which has been
taken from the treasury is put back there. Mr. Stener is out of town or
I would have brought him here with me."

Cowperwood was lying out of the whole cloth in regard to bringing Stener
with him, and he had no intention of putting the money back in the city
treasury except by degrees and in such manner as suited his convenience;
but what he had said sounded well and created a great seeming of
fairness.

"How much money is it Stener has invested with you?" asked Butler. He
was a little confused by this curious development. It put Cowperwood and
Stener in an odd light.

"About five hundred thousand dollars," replied Cowperwood.

The old man straightened up. "Is it as much as that?" he said.

"Just about--a little more or a little less; I'm not sure which."

The old contractor listened solemnly to all Cowperwood had to say on
this score, thinking of the effect on the Republican party and his own
contracting interests. He liked Cowperwood, but this was a rough thing
the latter was telling him--rough, and a great deal to ask. He was a
slow-thinking and a slow-moving man, but he did well enough when he did
think. He had considerable money invested in Philadelphia street-railway
stocks--perhaps as much as eight hundred thousand dollars. Mollenhauer
had perhaps as much more. Whether Senator Simpson had much or little he
could not tell. Cowperwood had told him in the past that he thought
the Senator had a good deal. Most of their holdings, as in the case of
Cowperwood's, were hypothecated at the various banks for loans and these
loans invested in other ways. It was not advisable or comfortable
to have these loans called, though the condition of no one of the
triumvirate was anything like as bad as that of Cowperwood. They could
see themselves through without much trouble, though not without probable
loss unless they took hurried action to protect themselves.

He would not have thought so much of it if Cowperwood had told him that
Stener was involved, say, to the extent of seventy-five or a hundred
thousand dollars. That might be adjusted. But five hundred thousand
dollars!

"That's a lot of money," said Butler, thinking of the amazing audacity
of Stener, but failing at the moment to identify it with the astute
machinations of Cowperwood. "That's something to think about. There's
no time to lose if there's going to be a panic in the morning. How much
good will it do ye if we do support the market?"

"A great deal," returned Cowperwood, "although of course I have to raise
money in other ways. I have that one hundred thousand dollars of yours
on deposit. Is it likely that you'll want that right away?"

"It may be," said Butler.

"It's just as likely that I'll need it so badly that I can't give it up
without seriously injuring myself," added Cowperwood. "That's just one
of a lot of things. If you and Senator Simpson and Mr. Mollenhauer
were to get together--you're the largest holders of street-railway
stocks--and were to see Mr. Drexel and Mr. Cooke, you could fix things
so that matters would be considerably easier. I will be all right if my
loans are not called, and my loans will not be called if the market does
not slump too heavily. If it does, all my securities are depreciated,
and I can't hold out."

Old Butler got up. "This is serious business," he said. "I wish you'd
never gone in with Stener in that way. It don't look quite right and it
can't be made to. It's bad, bad business," he added dourly. "Still, I'll
do what I can. I can't promise much, but I've always liked ye and I'll
not be turning on ye now unless I have to. But I'm sorry--very. And I'm
not the only one that has a hand in things in this town." At the same
time he was thinking it was right decent of Cowperwood to forewarn him
this way in regard to his own affairs and the city election, even though
he was saving his own neck by so doing. He meant to do what he could.

"I don't suppose you could keep this matter of Stener and the city
treasury quiet for a day or two until I see how I come out?" suggested
Cowperwood warily.

"I can't promise that," replied Butler. "I'll have to do the best I can.
I won't lave it go any further than I can help--you can depend on that."
He was thinking how the effect of Stener's crime could be overcome if
Cowperwood failed.

"Owen!"

He stepped to the door, and, opening it, called down over the banister.

"Yes, father."

"Have Dan hitch up the light buggy and bring it around to the door. And
you get your hat and coat. I want you to go along with me."

"Yes, father."

He came back.

"Sure that's a nice little storm in a teapot, now, isn't it? Chicago
begins to burn, and I have to worry here in Philadelphia. Well, well--"
Cowperwood was up now and moving to the door. "And where are you going?"

"Back to the house. I have several people coming there to see me. But
I'll come back here later, if I may."

"Yes, yes," replied Butler. "To be sure I'll be here by midnight,
anyhow. Well, good night. I'll see you later, then, I suppose. I'll tell
you what I find out."

He went back in his room for something, and Cowperwood descended the
stair alone. From the hangings of the reception-room entryway Aileen
signaled him to draw near.

"I hope it's nothing serious, honey?" she sympathized, looking into his
solemn eyes.

It was not time for love, and he felt it.

"No," he said, almost coldly, "I think not."

"Frank, don't let this thing make you forget me for long, please. You
won't, will you? I love you so."

"No, no, I won't!" he replied earnestly, quickly and yet absently.

"I can't! Don't you know I won't?" He had started to kiss her, but a
noise disturbed him. "Sh!"

He walked to the door, and she followed him with eager, sympathetic
eyes.

What if anything should happen to her Frank? What if anything could?
What would she do? That was what was troubling her. What would, what
could she do to help him? He looked so pale--strained.





Chapter XXIV


The condition of the Republican party at this time in Philadelphia,
its relationship to George W. Stener, Edward Malia Butler, Henry A.
Mollenhauer, Senator Mark Simpson, and others, will have to be briefly
indicated here, in order to foreshadow Cowperwood's actual situation.
Butler, as we have seen, was normally interested in and friendly to
Cowperwood. Stener was Cowperwood's tool. Mollenhauer and Senator
Simpson were strong rivals of Butler for the control of city affairs.
Simpson represented the Republican control of the State legislature,
which could dictate to the city if necessary, making new election laws,
revising the city charter, starting political investigations, and the
like. He had many influential newspapers, corporations, banks, at his
beck and call. Mollenhauer represented the Germans, some Americans, and
some large stable corporations--a very solid and respectable man. All
three were strong, able, and dangerous politically. The two latter
counted on Butler's influence, particularly with the Irish, and a
certain number of ward leaders and Catholic politicians and laymen,
who were as loyal to him as though he were a part of the church itself.
Butler's return to these followers was protection, influence, aid,
and good-will generally. The city's return to him, via Mollenhauer
and Simpson, was in the shape of contracts--fat ones--street-paving,
bridges, viaducts, sewers. And in order for him to get these contracts
the affairs of the Republican party, of which he was a beneficiary as
well as a leader, must be kept reasonably straight. At the same time it
was no more a part of his need to keep the affairs of the party straight
than it was of either Mollenhauer's or Simpson's, and Stener was not his
appointee. The latter was more directly responsible to Mollenhauer than
to any one else.

As Butler stepped into the buggy with his son he was thinking about
this, and it was puzzling him greatly.

"Cowperwood's just been here," he said to Owen, who had been rapidly
coming into a sound financial understanding of late, and was already a
shrewder man politically and socially than his father, though he had
not the latter's magnetism. "He's been tellin' me that he's in a rather
tight place. You hear that?" he continued, as some voice in the distance
was calling "Extra! Extra!" "That's Chicago burnin', and there's goin'
to be trouble on the stock exchange to-morrow. We have a lot of our
street-railway stocks around at the different banks. If we don't look
sharp they'll be callin' our loans. We have to 'tend to that the first
thing in the mornin'. Cowperwood has a hundred thousand of mine with him
that he wants me to let stay there, and he has some money that belongs
to Stener, he tells me."

"Stener?" asked Owen, curiously. "Has he been dabbling in stocks?" Owen
had heard some rumors concerning Stener and others only very recently,
which he had not credited nor yet communicated to his father. "How much
money of his has Cowperwood?" he asked.

Butler meditated. "Quite a bit, I'm afraid," he finally said. "As a
matter of fact, it's a great deal--about five hundred thousand dollars.
If that should become known, it would be makin' a good deal of noise,
I'm thinkin'."

"Whew!" exclaimed Owen in astonishment. "Five hundred thousand dollars!
Good Lord, father! Do you mean to say Stener has got away with five
hundred thousand dollars? Why, I wouldn't think he was clever enough to
do that. Five hundred thousand dollars! It will make a nice row if that
comes out."

"Aisy, now! Aisy, now!" replied Butler, doing his best to keep all
phases of the situation in mind. "We can't tell exactly what the
circumstances were yet. He mayn't have meant to take so much. It may all
come out all right yet. The money's invested. Cowperwood hasn't failed
yet. It may be put back. The thing to be settled on now is whether
anything can be done to save him. If he's tellin' me the truth--and I
never knew him to lie--he can get out of this if street-railway stocks
don't break too heavy in the mornin'. I'm going over to see Henry
Mollenhauer and Mark Simpson. They're in on this. Cowperwood wanted me
to see if I couldn't get them to get the bankers together and have them
stand by the market. He thought we might protect our loans by comin' on
and buyin' and holdin' up the price."

Owen was running swiftly in his mind over Cowperwood's affairs--as much
as he knew of them. He felt keenly that the banker ought to be shaken
out. This dilemma was his fault, not Stener's--he felt. It was strange
to him that his father did not see it and resent it.

"You see what it is, father," he said, dramatically, after a time.
"Cowperwood's been using this money of Stener's to pick up stocks, and
he's in a hole. If it hadn't been for this fire he'd have got away with
it; but now he wants you and Simpson and Mollenhauer and the others to
pull him out. He's a nice fellow, and I like him fairly well; but you're
a fool if you do as he wants you to. He has more than belongs to him
already. I heard the other day that he has the Front Street line,
and almost all of Green and Coates; and that he and Stener own the
Seventeenth and Nineteenth; but I didn't believe it. I've been intending
to ask you about it. I think Cowperwood has a majority for himself
stowed away somewhere in every instance. Stener is just a pawn. He moves
him around where he pleases."

Owen's eyes gleamed avariciously, opposingly. Cowperwood ought to be
punished, sold out, driven out of the street-railway business in which
Owen was anxious to rise.

"Now you know," observed Butler, thickly and solemnly, "I always thought
that young felly was clever, but I hardly thought he was as clever as
all that. So that's his game. You're pretty shrewd yourself, aren't you?
Well, we can fix that, if we think well of it. But there's more than
that to all this. You don't want to forget the Republican party. Our
success goes with the success of that, you know"--and he paused and
looked at his son. "If Cowperwood should fail and that money couldn't be
put back--" He broke off abstractedly. "The thing that's troublin' me
is this matter of Stener and the city treasury. If somethin' ain't done
about that, it may go hard with the party this fall, and with some of
our contracts. You don't want to forget that an election is comin'
along in November. I'm wonderin' if I ought to call in that one hundred
thousand dollars. It's goin' to take considerable money to meet my loans
in the mornin'."

It is a curious matter of psychology, but it was only now that the real
difficulties of the situation were beginning to dawn on Butler. In
the presence of Cowperwood he was so influenced by that young man's
personality and his magnetic presentation of his need and his own liking
for him that he had not stopped to consider all the phases of his own
relationship to the situation. Out here in the cool night air,
talking to Owen, who was ambitious on his own account and anything but
sentimentally considerate of Cowperwood, he was beginning to sober down
and see things in their true light. He had to admit that Cowperwood had
seriously compromised the city treasury and the Republican party, and
incidentally Butler's own private interests. Nevertheless, he liked
Cowperwood. He was in no way prepared to desert him. He was now going
to see Mollenhauer and Simpson as much to save Cowperwood really as
the party and his own affairs. And yet a scandal. He did not like
that--resented it. This young scalawag! To think he should be so sly.
None the less he still liked him, even here and now, and was feeling
that he ought to do something to help the young man, if anything could
help him. He might even leave his hundred-thousand-dollar loan with him
until the last hour, as Cowperwood had requested, if the others were
friendly.

"Well, father," said Owen, after a time, "I don't see why you need to
worry any more than Mollenhauer or Simpson. If you three want to help
him out, you can; but for the life of me I don't see why you should. I
know this thing will have a bad effect on the election, if it comes out
before then; but it could be hushed up until then, couldn't it? Anyhow,
your street-railway holdings are more important than this election, and
if you can see your way clear to getting the street-railway lines in
your hands you won't need to worry about any elections. My advice to
you is to call that one-hundred-thousand-dollar loan of yours in
the morning, and meet the drop in your stocks that way. It may make
Cowperwood fail, but that won't hurt you any. You can go into the market
and buy his stocks. I wouldn't be surprised if he would run to you and
ask you to take them. You ought to get Mollenhauer and Simpson to scare
Stener so that he won't loan Cowperwood any more money. If you don't,
Cowperwood will run there and get more. Stener's in too far now. If
Cowperwood won't sell out, well and good; the chances are he will bust,
anyhow, and then you can pick up as much on the market as any one
else. I think he'll sell. You can't afford to worry about Stener's five
hundred thousand dollars. No one told him to loan it. Let him look out
for himself. It may hurt the party, but you can look after that later.
You and Mollenhauer can fix the newspapers so they won't talk about it
till after election."

"Aisy! Aisy!" was all the old contractor would say. He was thinking
hard.





Chapter XXV


The residence of Henry A. Mollenhauer was, at that time, in a section of
the city which was almost as new as that in which Butler was living. It
was on South Broad Street, near a handsome library building which had
been recently erected. It was a spacious house of the type usually
affected by men of new wealth in those days--a structure four stories in
height of yellow brick and white stone built after no school which
one could readily identify, but not unattractive in its architectural
composition. A broad flight of steps leading to a wide veranda gave into
a decidedly ornate door, which was set on either side by narrow windows
and ornamented to the right and left with pale-blue jardinieres of
considerable charm of outline. The interior, divided into twenty rooms,
was paneled and parqueted in the most expensive manner for homes of that
day. There was a great reception-hall, a large parlor or drawing-room,
a dining-room at least thirty feet square paneled in oak; and on the
second floor were a music-room devoted to the talents of Mollenhauer's
three ambitious daughters, a library and private office for himself, a
boudoir and bath for his wife, and a conservatory.

Mollenhauer was, and felt himself to be, a very important man. His
financial and political judgment was exceedingly keen. Although he was
a German, or rather an American of German parentage, he was a man of a
rather impressive American presence. He was tall and heavy and shrewd
and cold. His large chest and wide shoulders supported a head of
distinguished proportions, both round and long when seen from different
angles. The frontal bone descended in a protruding curve over the
nose, and projected solemnly over the eyes, which burned with a shrewd,
inquiring gaze. And the nose and mouth and chin below, as well as his
smooth, hard cheeks, confirmed the impression that he knew very well
what he wished in this world, and was very able without regard to let or
hindrance to get it. It was a big face, impressive, well modeled. He was
an excellent friend of Edward Malia Butler's, as such friendships go,
and his regard for Mark Simpson was as sincere as that of one tiger for
another. He respected ability; he was willing to play fair when fair
was the game. When it was not, the reach of his cunning was not easily
measured.

When Edward Butler and his son arrived on this Sunday evening, this
distinguished representative of one-third of the city's interests was
not expecting them. He was in his library reading and listening to one
of his daughters playing the piano. His wife and his other two daughters
had gone to church. He was of a domestic turn of mind. Still, Sunday
evening being an excellent one for conference purposes generally in the
world of politics, he was not without the thought that some one or other
of his distinguished confreres might call, and when the combination
footman and butler announced the presence of Butler and his son, he was
well pleased.

"So there you are," he remarked to Butler, genially, extending his hand.
"I'm certainly glad to see you. And Owen! How are you, Owen? What will
you gentlemen have to drink, and what will you smoke? I know you'll have
something. John"--to the servitor---"see if you can find something for
these gentlemen. I have just been listening to Caroline play; but I
think you've frightened her off for the time being."

He moved a chair into position for Butler, and indicated to Owen another
on the other side of the table. In a moment his servant had returned
with a silver tray of elaborate design, carrying whiskies and wines of
various dates and cigars in profusion. Owen was the new type of young
financier who neither smoked nor drank. His father temperately did both.

"It's a comfortable place you have here," said Butler, without any
indication of the important mission that had brought him. "I don't
wonder you stay at home Sunday evenings. What's new in the city?"

"Nothing much, so far as I can see," replied Mollenhauer, pacifically.
"Things seem to be running smooth enough. You don't know anything that
we ought to worry about, do you?"

"Well, yes," said Butler, draining off the remainder of a brandy and
soda that had been prepared for him. "One thing. You haven't seen an
avenin' paper, have you?"

"No, I haven't," said Mollenhauer, straightening up. "Is there one out?
What's the trouble anyhow?"

"Nothing--except Chicago's burning, and it looks as though we'd have a
little money-storm here in the morning."

"You don't say! I didn't hear that. There's a paper out, is there? Well,
well--is it much of a fire?"

"The city is burning down, so they say," put in Owen, who was watching
the face of the distinguished politician with considerable interest.

"Well, that is news. I must send out and get a paper. John!" he called.
His man-servant appeared. "See if you can get me a paper somewhere." The
servant disappeared. "What makes you think that would have anything to
do with us?" observed Mollenhauer, returning to Butler.

"Well, there's one thing that goes with that that I didn't know till a
little while ago and that is that our man Stener is apt to be short in
his accounts, unless things come out better than some people seem to
think," suggested Butler, calmly. "That might not look so well
before election, would it?" His shrewd gray Irish eyes looked into
Mollenhauer's, who returned his gaze.

"Where did you get that?" queried Mr. Mollenhauer icily. "He hasn't
deliberately taken much money, has he? How much has he taken--do you
know?"

"Quite a bit," replied Butler, quietly. "Nearly five hundred thousand,
so I understand. Only I wouldn't say that it has been taken as yet. It's
in danger of being lost."

"Five hundred thousand!" exclaimed Mollenhauer in amazement, and yet
preserving his usual calm. "You don't tell me! How long has this been
going on? What has he been doing with the money?"

"He's loaned a good deal--about five hundred thousand dollars to this